A dream study for father-daughter duo
   dreams
   worked together on publishing a study on lucid dreaming that was
   inspired by Clara's dreams. Photo by Charlie Leight/ASU News
   Many parents only dream of sharing their passion with their child. But
   one father recently had an opportunity to make that dream a reality.
   frequency of lucid dreams.
   Lucid dreaming is the state of consciously realizing you are dreaming
   while still inside of the dream. The study offers insights into what
   makes some people more likely to have these unusual dream experiences.
   "There's not a whole lot of scientific work out there on lucid dreams,
   nor dreams more generally, compared to other topics that modern
   psychologists tend to study,” Varnum said. “Dreams are inherently
   fascinating to most of us, and lucid dreams especially. But we know
   The study ran in “Dreaming,” a scientific journal published by the
   Our fascination with dreams goes back to ancient times when
   In psychological studies of dreams, called oneirology, researchers
   focus on how dreams relate to brain function, especially memory and
   mental health. Unlike dream interpretation, which looks for meaning,
   scientific dream research studies how dreaming works using measurable
   differences and the propensity to experience lucid dreams,” wrote
   dreams.”
   The researchers explored the link between lucid dream frequency and
   along with a cognitive curiosity were more likely to have lucid dreams.
   dreams,” Varnum said.
   lucid dreams as well as more unusual dreams — dreams where the person
   visits the same fictitious place or has dream friends that don't exist
   And they found that it is not always “sweet dreams” for lucid dreamers.
   people who report more nightmares also have more lucid dreams,” Varnum
   Academy. “And also, it's rare that I have a dream that I remember not
   experience lucid dreams. People who were considered “emotionally
   stable” were also less likely to experience lucid dreams. No gender
The dream team
   The idea for a lucid dream study sprung from an ordinary conversation
   interesting. We were talking about a dream she'd had — a lucid dream —
   and how we, and probably lots of other folks, have dreams where we
   studies in this area. Dreams have always intrigued people, but lucid
   dreams have been gaining significant scientific attention in recent
   that coauthoring the study helped her learn more about lucid dreams as
