How to Analyze a Dream Using Jungian Dream Analysis
   Jul 17, 2020 / The Twelve Mysteries / carl jung / dream analysis
   Dreaming of ants begging for jungian dream analysis treatment,
   cyanotype I Dream of Ants. Cyanotype on Paper, 2020. Two Print sizes. ©
     Dreams are the guiding words of the soul. Why should I henceforth
     not love my dreams and not make their riddling images into objects
   Last weekend, I had a dream that mystified me so much that I had to
   This article describes a step-by-step process in dream interpretation
   dreams, I recommend a good book to get you started.
   But first, I want to tell you about the dream.
The Dream
   mirror-cubicle on the other side. In this dream, I’m sitting on one
   I usually don’t remember my dreams, but this one was so vivid that I
   couldn’t believe my eyes. Ants. I saw the ants from my dream.
Where Do Dreams Come From?
   century, the “why” and “how” of dreams are largely undeveloped from the
   Carl Jung’s theory. He considered dreams to be messages from the
     “Dreams are impartial, spontaneous products of the unconscious
   and mythology. Now I can add dreams and the unconscious to the mix of
   If dreams are messages from the unconscious, then what was my
A Warning about Dream Analysis
   But before we begin, a word of caution. Dream analysis engages the
     to analyse dreams. Something deeply buried and invisible may thereby
   wrong. And if you are still interested in exploring dream
Step-by-Step Process for Interpreting Dreams
   wrote Inner Work: Using Dreams and Active Imagination for Personal
    1. Write the Dream in Detail
    3. Connect Dream Images to What’s Happening Internally
    4. Interpret the Dream
    5. Do a Ritual to Make the Dream Concrete
Step 1 Write the Dream in Detail
   Write your dream immediately after waking up. Otherwise, you will
   journal. Dreams would be a great addition to that journal.
   Write down all the dream details even if they appear unimportant:
   “internal talk” and emotions while dreaming the dream.
   The next step is to make associations. Think of the dream image and
   dream, the “work setting” symbolized drudgery, stress, and competition.
   Do this for every dream detail you wrote down in your journal.
   Don’t consult a dream dictionary. Dream symbols are unique to you, so
   exception is if the dream contains archetypal motifs common to the
Step 3 Connect Dream Images to What’s Happening Internally
   Just like when reading mythology, dreams are not meant to be
   interpreted literally. The language of dreams and the unconscious is
   external environment to symbolize things in the dream. For example, in
   my dream, the characters Phillip and Reid do not actually refer to the
   dreams are usually about the interior world rather than the external
Step 4 Interpret the Dream
   Taking all the things you wrote before, interpret the dream. Remember
   that a dream is a coherent message from the unconscious cloaked in
   symbolism. When you interpret the dream and arrive at an interpretation
       or are conscious of. Thus the dream’s message should be a surprise
     * If you arrive at a dream interpretation that is self-congratulatory
       interpretation is also incorrect. Dreams are about you and not
       others. Remember that all the characters in your dream represent
Step 5 Do a Ritual to Make the Dream Concrete
   After interpreting the dream, honor it by doing something physical (and
   the dream, which was unconscious, into your conscious waking life. The
My Dream Interpretation
   Now, I’m going to apply these steps to my dream. I cover a number of
   symbols from my dream: the work setting, the mirror-cubicle setup, my
   may change the more I think about the dream in the coming days.
   So, why did this dream show that I was back at my accounting job? That
   me. What the dream was really asking was, “Hey Jonah, do you want to be
   and yet here he was in my dream personifying photography.
   troublemaker. This is the only dream detail that feels archetypal. Is
   interpreting the dream. I wanted the dream to have a positive outcome,
   after the dream. In the end, the following strangely resonated:
What Does this Dream Mean?
   Taking all the above into account, I now believe that this dream is
   this, but I sense that this conclusion is true. The dream seems to be
   chair, so that appears out as well. The dream is saying that I have to
   What is interesting about the dream is that it actually had three
   chairs: the chair I was sitting on at the beginning of the dream, the
   during the dream. I will have to think about it in the coming days.
   Usually in dream interpretation, the unconscious leaves a little clue
   In the meantime, I completed a ritual to acknowledge this dream. I
Interested in Analyzing Your Dream?
   dream. This article barely scratches the surface of Carl Jung dream
   Inner Work: Using Dreams and Active Imagination for Personal
   I had another dream on August 6, 2020, that clarified the meaning of
   the third chair. Read The Dream That Changed My Life.
       I've always been fascinated with dream interpretations, so I'm glad
       to reinforce the dreams, so I'll dig a bit deeper into them.
   The Dream That Changed My Life
