The science of dreams: what happens in the brain when we dream
   ||Dreaming|||||||||||||||dreams, meditation, sleep|dreams, meditation,
   sleep|dreams, meditation, sleep||||
   What happens when we dream may still feel mysterious, but research is
   and emotion. While the science behind dreams is still unfolding,
   experts believe dreaming helps us process emotions, store key memories,
   dreams, meditation, sleep
   Let’s be real - dreams are dreamy. There’s so much we don’t know about
   seeing people from your past, our dreams are full of mystery and
   For centuries, humans believed dreams were messages from the gods or
   what really happens in the brain while we sleep—and why dreams might
   In this article, we’ll explore the science behind dreaming: how dreams
How do dreams work?
   Dreaming has fascinated humans for centuries. When you look at ancient
   civilizations, they believed dreams were prophecies or divine messages
   While the exact purpose of dreaming remains unclear, modern science has
   REM sleep, known as the stage where dreams are most vivid—activates
   deactivating the prefrontal cortex, which explains why dreams often
   feel illogical (3). These neural patterns support theories that dreams
Alternative function of dreaming
   Some researchers believe dreams serve practical functions beyond
   storytelling. The threat simulation theory suggests dreaming evolved to
   Others argue dreams act as neural housekeeping, clearing out irrelevant
   theory has been proven, most agree that dreaming reflects coordinated
What part of the brain controls dreams?
   Dreams aren’t driven by a single control center—they emerge from a
   narrative flow of dreams (9).
   dreams—like walking through a room or flying over a city (10). The
   meet, has been linked to self-awareness during dreaming, and may play a
   key role in lucid dreaming, which is when someone realizes they’re
   dreaming while it’s happening (11).
   theory that explains exactly why we dream or how dreams are generated
Dreams & what’s happening in the brain
   Dreaming is such a fascinating topic because everyone dreams (even if
   you don’t remember them), but the experience of dreaming can vary from
   person to person. We do know that most dreams last about 5-20 minutes,
   and you can have multiple dreams in a night. The variability is in the
   experience of dreaming, recollection, and intensity (12).
   Some people remember their dreams vividly, and others do not. Some have
   the same dream over and over while others rarely repeat a dream. Some
   remember only a handful of dreams in their lifetime but others can
   recall dreams nightly. Some are lucid dreamers, and most of us are not.
   Others dream in color, while some dream in black and white (13).
   dreams, meditation, sleep
A deeper look: dreams in REM
   You can dream in any stage, but most dreaming appears to occur during
   their dreams in a REM state, compared to other states, and after REM
   dreaming can be viewed as a virtual reality created from our brain’s
   devise.” In other words, “we sense, we act and we feel” what we dream
   sleeping could shape our dreams.
dreams, meditation, sleep Muse’s sleep stages graph (hypnogram) above shows
   scores using Muse. While asleep, participants underwent sensory dream
    1. Ameliorated Dream Valence – After introducing pleasurable or
       affective responses (17) while dreaming that are associated with
   When you dream, your whole brain is active at some level. However,
   don’t recognize the strangeness or implausibility of a dream until we
   monsters seems so realistic until you wake up from that dream (or
Modern theories on dreams
   some modern theories suggest that dreams may not carry deep symbolic
   Still, other researchers argue that dreaming serves a deeper
   Here are three leading theories on why we dream:
   that REM sleep—and the dreaming that occurs during it—helps sort,
   store, or even discard memories. In this view, dreaming is like a
   Because dreaming is present in other mammals, some believe it serves an
   evolutionary function. One theory suggests dreams allow us to mentally
   adaptive in waking life. Others propose that dreaming supports
   (and therefore dream less) often show more difficulty managing emotions
   So while the exact purpose of dreaming isn’t fully proven, the evidence
   Even though we may not fully understand why we dream, or how the brain
   pulls it off so vividly, what we do know is this: dreams aren’t just
Frequently asked questions about dreams & the brain
   What happens in the brain when we dream?
   When we dream, especially during REM sleep, brain activity increases in
   combination allows dreams to be vivid, emotional, and often surreal.
   What part of the brain controls dreaming?
   Dreams are shaped by a network of brain regions, including the default
   dreaming). There is no single "dream center."
   How long do dreams last?
   Most dreams last between 5 to 20 minutes, and you can have several
   dreams throughout the night, especially during longer REM sleep cycles
   Can you control your dreams?
   Yes—this is called lucid dreaming. It happens when the dreamer becomes
   aware they’re dreaming and may even influence the dream’s direction.
   Lucid dreaming is often linked to activity in the temporo-parietal
   Why don’t we remember our dreams?
   You’re more likely to remember a dream if you wake up during or right
   also limit the brain’s ability to encode dream content into long-term
   Does dreaming serve a purpose?
   While still debated, current research suggests dreaming may support
    1. Bulkeley, K. (2016). Big dreams: The science of dreaming and the
    2. Big Dreams: The Science of Dreaming and the Origins of Religion,
       P1&dq=science+of+dreaming+scholarly+articles&ots=XhMok2QgJ1&sig=_Rv
       and dreams. Scribner.
       Revonsuo, A. (2000). The reinterpretation of dreams: An
       evolutionary hypothesis of the function of dreaming. Behavioral and
    9. Domhoff, G. W. (2011). Dreams are embodied simulations that
       Journal of Dream Research, 4(2), 50–62.
       Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: Evidence from
   14. Bulkeley, K. (2016). Big dreams: The science of dreaming and the
       Maes. “Dream engineering: Simulating worlds through sensory
       Maes, P., “Dormio: Interfacing with Dreams” Association for
   18.  Bulkeley, K. (2016). Big dreams: The science of dreaming and the
