Why Your Brain Needs to Dream
   Research shows that dreaming is not just a byproduct of sleep, but
   We often hear stories of people who’ve learned from their dreams or
   song “Yesterday” came to him in a dream or of Mendeleev’s
   dream-inspired construction of the periodic table of elements.
   But, while many of us may feel that our dreams have special meaning or
   our unconscious, some scientists have considered dreaming to be an
   Power of Sleep and Dreams, which summarizes the many findings we have
   But what about dreaming? Does it also have a purpose?
   shown that dreams may have a very particular function important to our
   well-being. Here are the two main ways dreams help us.
Dreaming is like overnight therapy
   time spent in dream sleep is what heals. REM-sleep dreaming appears to
   during REM sleep as we dream. This means that emotional memory
   That in itself doesn’t say anything about the role of dreaming. But we
   the dream state determined the success of overnight therapy from one
   Dreaming has the potential to help people de-escalate emotional
   reactivity, probably because the emotional content of dreams is paired
   The evidence points toward an important function of dreams: to help us
Dreaming enhances creativity and problem-solving
   together in abstract and highly novel ways. During the dreaming state,
   How do we know dreaming and not just sleep is important to this
   night—during both non-REM sleep and dreaming sleep—and gave them very
   participants woken while dreaming reported that the solution just
   seems to be the work of REM-sleep dreaming.
     time spent in dream sleep is what heals”
   Dreaming improves creative problem solving, too, according to another
   content of their dreams; those watching a video were also asked about
   expected. But the nappers who reported dreaming about the maze were 10
   times better at the task than those who napped and didn’t dream about
   Looking at the content of these dreams, it was clear that the
   participants didn’t dream a precise replay of the learning experience
   preexisting knowledge. This is how dreaming helps us be more creative.
   While the benefits of dreaming are real, too many of us have problems
   Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams (Scribner, 2017,
   So how can we be sure to get enough sleep and experience a dream state?
   been shown to be detrimental to dreaming. Instead of taking pills, here
   and physical health each day. Atop of sleep, dreaming provides
