   #The Millions » On Dreams and Literature Comments Feed JSON oEmbed
On Dreams and Literature
   “We are such stuff/As dreams are made on, and our little life/Is
   — Roy Orbison, “In Dreams” (1963)
   warmth and the light induce dreams. Sometime in the late
   cover Piers Plowman is of a medieval poetic genre known as a dream
   allegory, or even more enticingly as a dream vision. Most famous of
   didn’t originate the dream vision, but it was the golden age of the
   explains in Medieval Dream-Poetry that while sleeping “we undergo
   paradise — were not dreams, and yet everything in The Divine Comedy
   substance of dreams. Forget the didactic obviousness of allegory, the
   of eternity while sleeping. What makes the dream vision a chimerical
   form is that maybe he did. That’s the thing with dreams and their
   of fantasy or myth, for in dreams order has been abolished, anything is
   A danger to this, for to dream is to court the absolute when we’re at
   connections[. T]he larger point is that dreaming can get you in
   trouble. That’s because dreaming is the only realm in which we’re
   cover Dreams had a radical import in George Orwell’s dystopian classic
   character himself has a role in). Yet his dreams are one aspect of his
   life which the government can’t quite control, for Smith “had dreamed
   dreamer is at the whims of something much larger and more powerful than
   themselves, and by contrast where sometimes the dreamer finds
   Whether it’s the thirteenth or the twenty-first centuries, dreaming
   remains bizarre. Whether we reduce dreams to messages from the gods and
   dreams). So strange is it that we spend a third of our lives journeying
   that when William Langland dreamt, is it possible that he dreamt of me?
   ancestors saw in dreams portents and prophecies, then this oracular
   Dreams. He who inaugurated the nascent field of psychoanalysis
   explained dreams as a complex tapestry of wish fulfillment and
   writes that there “exists a psychological technique by which dreams may
   be interpreted and that upon the application of this method every dream
   origin may be different — Langland sees in dreams visions imparted from
   idea isn’t dissimilar. Dreaming imparts an ordered and ultimately
   serotonin. For neurologists, dreaming is a function of the prefrontal
   and why dreaming happens — what parts of the brain are involved, what
   dreaming evolved, and what functions (if any) it could possibly serve.
   Gone are the simple reductionisms of dream interpretation manuals with
   sober view of dreaming, whereby random bits of imagery and thought
   notes in The Mind at Night: The New Science of How and Why we Dream,
   simple as the definition of dreaming.” If we’re such stuff as dreams
   cover Not that dreaming is exclusively a human activity. Scientists
   deeper reverie where she just smiled. Dreaming may not necessarily be a
   dream — albeit it’s harder to study creatures more distant from us.
   dream for a very long time, as it turns out. Rock writes that “Because
   don’t know if dinosaurs dreamt, but something skittering around and out
   and if dreaming goes back to the Cretaceous, what then of the future of
   dreaming? If dogs and donkeys, cats and camels are capable of dreaming,
   will artificial intelligences dream? This is the question asked by
   Philip K. Dick‘s Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, which was itself
   the radical potential of dreams. Dick imagined robots capable of
   dreaming with such verisimilitude that they misapprehended themselves
   produced by a complex artificial neural network as it “dreams,”
   from chaos, what dreams could be generated therein? Or if it’s possible
   to program a computer, a robot, an android, an automaton to dream, then
   of the Delphic Oracle analyzing its own microchipped dreams. “The
   lived. If you refresh the site, you’ll see that the humans dreamt of by
   person we encounter in our dreams has a corollary to somebody that we
   One fictional person who reoccurs in many of our dreams is “This Man,”
   Natella’s now defunct website “Ever Dream This Man?” According to
   Natella, scores of people had dreams about the man (occasionally
   65^th emerging simultaneously in thousands of peoples’ dreams (his
   Meme campaigns aside, the sheer weirdness of dreams can’t quite
   now I’ve had dreams that take place in the same recurring location — a
   dreams about this place, it’s that the place is the same, regardless of
   what happens to me in those dreams when I’m there. So much so that I
   experience the uncanny feeling of not dreaming, but rather of sliding
   no doubt yourself — the dream realm is accessible to everyone. As
   dustiest filthiest place I ever saw.” While “in a half dreaming state”
   own hymn while in a reverie. Howe’s dreaming was in keeping with a
   me in the night.” The apocalyptic Civil War altered peoples’ dreams, it
   Midnight in America: Darkness, Sleep, and Dreams During the Civil War,
   arguing that peoples’ “dream reports were often remarkably raw and
   Every era imparts its own images, symbols, and themes into dreams, so
   era. White writes that during the Civil War people used dreams to
   our current reposes. One of the most famous of Civil War dreamers was
   dream in which he wandered from room to room in the White House. “I
   vestments,” the body inside being that of Lincoln. Such dreams are
   cover Within literature dreams seem to always have something to say, a
   Sandman, and Lewis Carol’s Alice in Wonderland. The dream kingdom is a
   subsumed into a fantastical dream realm, but there are plenty of books
   with more prosaic dream sequences, from Mr. Lockwood’s harrowing
   childhood dreams in Fyodor Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment. “I’ve
   dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me ever after, and
   is the literature that emerges from dreams, the half-remembered
   which dreams transact themselves, but the outer, public world of
   back from the place you go to when you sleep. Dreaming and reading are
   corrupted outside world. There are no pop-up ads in dreams, there are
   Dreaming is the substance of literature. It’s what comes before,
   dreaming than reading (and by proxy writing, which is just
   and dreaming is who directs the story. As in a book as in our slumber,
   dreamer/reader. What you see when you close your eyes is forever
   do when you crack open a novel. “Life, what is it but a dream?” Carol
   We spend a third of our day in dream realms, which is why philosophers
   and poets have always rightly been preoccupied with them. Dreams
   dreaming is just as important as the oddity of existing for a spell in
   What unites the illusions of dreams and our complete ownership of them
   exact moment is lived or dreamt.
   thought that all the world was the dream of God and the dreamer was
   things are merely the delusions of dreams which he has devised to
   dream, Descartes tried to latch onto anything that could be certain.
   Other than his own mind, he wasn’t able to find much. In dreams there
   Your Boat.” When it queried if “life is but a dream,” I took that
   friends and family, are but a dream. And I wondered what it would be
   like when I woke up, who I would recount that marvelous dream too? “I
   had the strangest dream last night,” I imagined telling faces unknown
   all of us, was a dream — and who is to know what that world might look
   this sense of unreality, of dreams impinging on our not-quite-real
   Here’s the thing though — even if all of this is a dream — it doesn’t
   matter. Because in dreams you’re innocent. In dreams you’re free.
