The Fascinating Neuroscience of Lucid Dreaming
   In our dreams, we typically don’t question bizarre phenomena, like
   the strange reality of our dream worlds, unable to find a reasonable
   fly, and we realize: This is a dream.
   The state of recognizing you are dreaming is known as lucid dreaming.
   “The mind is quite restricted during sleep and dreaming, but lucid
   dreaming is the exception. Our reflective capability can be as strong
   For the most part, we can't consciously choose what we dream about. But
   actively recognizing you are dreaming creates the opportunity for
   varying levels of dream control. Advanced lucid dreamers can alter the
   plot of their dreams, transform themselves into animals or other
   Most people lucid dream just a few times in their lifetime, if at all.
   And even if they gain an awareness of their dream state, it’s even more
   rare to be able to actively control their dream content in real time.
   dreams on a regular basis,” said Benjamin Baird, an assistant research
Piecing Together What Makes a Lucid Dream
   around the world to try to get a clearer picture of the lucid dreaming
   Dresler’s team found lucid dreaming is associated with widespread
   “After the initial Eureka-like insight of ‘I’m in a dream!’, this
   realization just lingers in the back of the lucid dreamer’s mind,
   whereas the ongoing dream scenario … [is] in the mental focus,” Dresler
   actual dream, he added, making their EEG recordings hard to capture.
   regions, but they are expensive, and because lucid dreams are so rare,
   the only fMRI ever performed of an actively lucid dreaming brain. They
   while lucid dreaming.
   of 14 frequent lucid dreamers while they were awake and not performing
   observations of the brain while actively lucid dreaming: increased
   association hubs in the brain[s]” of frequent lucid dreamers, said
   Baird. This research suggests frequent lucid dreamers have a relatively
The Effect of Dreams on Waking Life
   Those with strong dream control use this power in a variety of ways,
   dreamers even use their sleeping hours to train for sports or dance
   dreaming is wish fulfillment. Lucid dreamers are able to carry out
   lucid dreams seem to have a “spill-over effect” into waking life,
   dreaming’s potential for treating mental health disorders. In 2018, the
   insomnia with lucid dream therapy, which can ameliorate some
   But turning lucid dreaming into a treatment may not be so simple, and
   lucid dreaming can result in sleep paralysis — waking up but being
   between dream life and reality, which can exacerbate symptoms for those
   dreaming are difficult to master and almost guarantee multiple nights
   of interrupted sleep. In the 1990s, lucid dream induction headsets hit
   dream frequency by up to 42% compared to placebo. The drug increases
   sleep, which is when most lucid dreaming occurs.
   However, some believe the therapeutic potential of lucid dreaming comes
   meditation may encourage lucid dreaming while offering the added
   skills required to lucid dream. “You kind of develop this ‘witness
   Research shows long-term meditators are prone to lucid dreaming. But in
   weeks of mindfulness training, they found no increase in lucid dream
   be more effective in facilitating lucid dreaming than others.
An Ancient Practice to Control Your Dreams
   studying the effects of Tibetan dream yoga on sleep and mental health.
   induce lucid dreams for personal insight and spiritual growth.
   Katie Love, a dream yoga practitioner and participant in Torres-Platas’
   life encourages a lack of awareness in dream states.
   Dream yogis perform seemingly impossible tasks in their lucid dreams,
   like transforming into different dream characters, walking through
   dream worlds, which may foster a greater sense of empowerment and
   “when you can go into a dream and change your environment by, for
   awake, combined with lucid dreaming while asleep, may help ease
   dreaming may teach us how to better navigate difficult circumstances.
   stuck in a swirling pit of despair, lucid dreaming might open a path to
   Neuroscience study, “Electrophysiological Correlates of Lucid Dreaming:
   lucid dreaming associated with increased functional connectivity
   Increased lucid dream frequency in long-term meditators but not
   Bonamino, C., Watling, C., Polman, R. (2024) Sleep and lucid dreaming
   Carr, Michelle. (2024). “The New Science of Controlling Lucid Dreams.”
   https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/engineering-lucid-dreams-cou
   M. (2025). Electrophysiological Correlates of Lucid Dreaming: Sensor
   Correlates of Dream Lucidity Obtained from Contrasting Lucid versus
   Gerhardt, E. & Baird, B. (2024) Frequent Lucid Dreaming Is Associated
   galantamine stimulates lucid dreaming: A double-blind,
   Schofield, Daisy. (2021). "Lucid dreamers are using unproven tech to
   https://www.wired.com/story/lucid-dreaming-tech/#:~:text=The%20ZMax%20h
   Stumbrys, T. & Erlacher, D. (2016) Applications of lucid dreams and
   Dream Research, 9(2).
   Dresler, M. (2025) The clinical neuroscience of lucid dreaming.
   Related Topics Dreams Sleep Thinking, Sensing & Behaving Thinking &
       -Behaving/Sleep/Article-Images/lucid-dreaming.jpg
       The Fascinating Neuroscience of Lucid Dreaming
