   #Literary Hub » What, to the Writer, Are Dreams? Comments Feed JSON
   What, to the Writer, <br>Are Dreams?
Are Dreams?
Dream Life and Creativity
   “Dream is the personalized myth, myth the depersonalized dream.”
   previous night’s dream to my mother. When I finished, she said, “I’m
   going to tell you something. Don’t ever share your dreams with anyone
   except your spouse. It’s boring to listen to other people’s dreams.”
   mother, fail to find my dreams as fascinating as I did? But of course
   about their dreams. As a rule, dreams die in the glare of the waking
   psyche. And yet, paradoxically, it’s the emotional aura of dreams that
   my dreams promiscuously—just not verbally.
   Like so many other writers and artists, I employ dreams in my creative
   allegorical dream story. Sometimes, a vision or scenario arrives as a
   blindfolded child. A haunting dream of orange curtains in a hotel room
   ever appear). And the power and mystery of dreams themselves inspired
   ultimately enters—her vivid, seemingly premonitory dreams.
   from dreams. As legend has it, the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge
   transcribed the first lines of “Kubla Khan” from a dream; the idea for
   conceived of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in a consumptive fever dream;
   William Styron had a dream that inspired Sophie’s Choice. One of the
   most prolific dream miners of all was Edgar Allen Poe, who used his
   dreamed the tune for the song “Yesterday.” Upon waking, he asked his
   couldn’t have written it because I dreamt it.”
   Dreams can feel like messages from another place, so it’s no surprise
   that many ancient cultures believed dreams to be transmissions of
   divine knowledge. The Ancient Egyptians considered dreams to be
   oracular and held vivid dreamers in high regard. They practiced dream
   incubation and lucid dreaming, and employed dream guides called the
   “Masters of Secret Things” who lived in dream temples. The Greeks, too,
   incubated dreams, and thought that gods came to dreamers through a
   Iroquois started their day by sharing dreams, which were considered a
   religion, too, believes that in dreams one is given a glimpse of
   Vishnu, whose own dreaming mind creates our reality. It isn’t difficult
   to understand where such beliefs come from if you’ve ever dreamed of
   have written it,” you might think, “because I dreamt it.”
   dreams, akin to pinning down the present moment, halting the slippage
   Brain science validates this phenomenon. Dreaming occurs during REM
   down. Dreams are the mysterious activity of another part of the brain,
   Because of this deep rift, the great majority of our dreams go
   discerned via the remembered scraps of dreams. Any glimmers of
   awareness that may come during sleep, when a dream is fleetingly
   In siphoning dreams for their work, writers and artists are tapping a
   valuable well. Dream logic and imagery carries an uncanny, allegorical
   possible that dream recall actually enhances artistic output during
   dream recall and creativity; those who recall dreams actually perform
   are naturally better at recalling their dreams. It’s a chicken or egg
   situation: do creative people have more vivid and memorable dreams
   through strengthening dream recall? Whatever the case, making use of
   dreams in art is a powerful way to reflect our foreign selves back to
   archetypal image and story—dream as personalized myth, myth as
   depersonalized dream.
   dreaming. It’s half-awareness—one foot in, one foot out—a balance on
   the brink of consciousness. It’s not just in dreams that we can
   appearing. Just as in a lucid dream, this exhilaration is paired with
   If writing fiction is analogous to dreaming, the experience of reading
   atmosphere and mood. We are, in a way, sharing a dream with a stranger.
   allegory, myth, dream—a truth that has always been there, that we
   the subliminal wholeness of life, the enveloping dream of Vishnu. What
   creativity dreaming dreams Grove Atlantic Lauren Acampora The Paper
