Dreaming
Dream a Little Dream of Me
Our nighttime dreams and even daydreams can help improve our relationships.
     * Dreams offer new ways of seeing waking-life relationships.
     * Daydreaming can help us gain perspectives, imagine solutions to
   Have you ever dreamed about someone you know?
   Dreams are a mix of the strange and the familiar. While sometimes in
   nighttime dreams we interact with people we’ve never met before, often
   Perhaps surprisingly, the material in our night dreams and even
   daydreams offer unexpected ways to improve our existing, waking
   others. Here are three tools for using our nighttime dreams and
   daydreaming to improve our relationships.
Relationship Tool 1: Dreams Hold Other Perspectives
   Yet our nighttime dreams can help return us to a more expanded view.
   While we dream about people we know in waking time, rarely do the
   familiar faces in our dreams behave exactly as we would expect them to
   Often the difference between a person in our dreams and the way we
   something more direct. For example, once I dreamed of a work colleague
   difficult. In the dream, the same person knocked on my door and, when I
   In the dream, I simply listened, then shut the door. But in the
   morning, reflecting on the dream, I asked myself whether there was
   Daydreaming utilizes the same default network of neural processing that
   operates in our night dreams. We think about this cognitive powerhouse
   One approach to understanding dreams is to view each of the aspects of
   a dream as an aspect of the dreamer. In other words, the people we
   dreams, we can consider, for example, our own moments of acting staid
   Dreaming Essential Reads
   What Makes Some Dreams Impossible to Forget?
   What Are Dreams Made Of?
   myriad perspectives in our dreams remind us that whatever our current
   Dreams and our imagination offer a library of feelings, solutions,
   sink into in our daydreaming. You’ll be surprised how much you can
   with dreams and nightmares. Person-Centered & Experiential
   Dreams to Transform Your Life, is the founder and CEO of the
   International Institute for Dreaming and Imagery.
   The International Institute for Dreaming and Imagery, Facebook,
