         Revelation, Nonsense or Dyspepsia: Victorian Dream Theories
   Upon reading a dream episode in a novel by Dickens, or the Brontes, or
   consider dreams to be? This simple question leads to others: are
   literary dreams the same as real dreams? should we interpret them as
   such? perhaps even, what do we believe dreams to be? If we distinguish
   real dreams from those in novels—that is, in conventionalized,
   artificial forms—then the interpretation of these literary dreams
   character's dreams contain some significance, of course. We can consult
   imagined the dream to have meant. Warnings against the intentional
   fallacy notwithstanding, an author's apprehensions of what dreams are,
   them clearly matter in the process of composing a dream episode. These
   Dickens believe dreams to be?
   Dickens composed a vast quantity of literary dreams throughout his
   Christmas Carol and The Chimes. Dickens depicts dreams and dreaming not
   nonfictional ones: examples include "An Italian Dream" in Pictures From
   published numerous articles on dreams in his magazines Household Words
   Dickens and Victorian theories of dreaming, published in 1981 in the
   the autobiographical origins of dreams" (205). Ronald R. Thomas
   Great Expectations and A Christmas Carol in Dream s of Authority: Freud
   of Dreams (published one hundred years ago) revolutionized the
   scientific study of dreams, and provided a framework for the
   of dreams, and so our tendency may be to apply these notions to the
   dreams we find in novels written before 1900 as well as to those
   intuitively Freudian notion of dreaming. We also assume that literary
   dreams operate in the same manner as actual dreams (Freud himself
   proposes this approach in "Delusions and Dreams in Jensen's Gradiva").
   These assumptions require careful scrutiny, however, if literary dreams
   are not real dreams (that is,artifacts of the unconscious), but
   dreams arise from a historical and cultural context, and reflect not
   theories about dreams (from both scientific and popular sources), as
   well as conventional literary representations of dreams and visions. To
   intuitively Freudian notion of dreaming is to wrench him from his
   textual evidence, for Dickens's own writings on dreams reveal complex
   assumptions about the causes and meanings of dreams. This complexity
   stems from the conflicting theories of dreaming in the Victorian
   In order to understand how Dickens used dreams, then, we must return to
   the question: What would he consider dreams to be? Dickens grew up
   on the mysterious nature and meaning of dreams.
   reading about dreams?" Scientific studies, or at least studies which
   oneirocriticism (or dream interpretation guides) and spiritual accounts
   of revelatory dreams.
   Man (1749). Hartley deduces three causes for dreams: the residue of
   daily impressions, the physical state of the dreamer's stomach and
   Dreams and Other Transient Illusions (1832); Robert Macnish's The
   Curiosities of Dreams (1865); and William Hammond's Sleep and Its
   shape our dreams, Abercrombie describes how his friend, James Gregory,
   dreamed he was walking on Mt. Aetna (260). Abercrombie makes no
   Macnish repeats the anecdote of Dr. Gregory's dream, and thirty-seven
   applied to their feet dreaming of walking on burning lava, or some
   the same stimulus will produce similar dreams did not appear until
   of stimulation and suggestion in shaping dreams.
   Certain general assumptions about dreams recur in these scientific
   studies. One often repeated point is that dreams only occur in
   imperfect sleep. Newnham states, "There are no dreams in natural
   mind at ease." Dreams occur only in a "morbid" state, when the brain is
   of the organs remain awake while the others sleep, dreaming results
   (43). The rationale seems to be that dreaming has to occur in an
   aberrant state of mind, because of the irrational nature of dreams.
   dreaming and insanity. Abercrombie compares how in both dreaming and
   calls a dream a "transient delirium," which resembles insanity in the
   that dreams originate in both previous mental associations and existing
   on the effect of diet on the content of dreams. He contends that "a
   disordered state of the stomach and liver will often produce dreams,"
   and that as a general rule dyspepsia produces bad dreams (53). A final
   their denial of prophetic powers in dreams. Dendy states that although
   the notion of revelatory dreams is "entertained generally," we no
   the scientific view of dreams had strong competition for popular
   We find that competition in dream books and spiritual accounts of
   revelatory dreams. Dream books, inexpensive handbooks for the most
   them if they appear in the reader's dreams. These books invariably
   claim that an understanding of dreams will help the reader prosper, or
   second-century dream book the Oneirocriticon (or The Interpretation of
   Dreams) of Artemidorus (first translated into English in 1643),
   nineteenth-century dream books are often anonymous works plagiarized
   heavily from previous dream books, sometimes only altering the title
   of Dreams and Visions. This text presents "the Nature, Causes, and Uses
   of various kinds of Dreams and Representations," and lists various
   objects and actions in dreams, with their meanings. Another widely read
   type of dream book, more spiritual and less pragmatic, catalogues
   narratives of revelatory dreams and other mysterious phenomena. Some of
   Mrs. Blair's Dreams and Dreaming (1843) contains narratives of
   premonitory dreams drawn from the Bible and contemporary accounts, and
   the author treats these dreams as divine revelations that God offers as
   dreams in general are, there are doubtless two classes of agents that
   dreaming planted in the human brain" as "a dreaming organ" analogous to
   prophetic dreams, and explains that "The soul, which is designed as the
   receives, in dreams, some rays from above, and enjoys a foretaste of
   asserts, "A dream may be prophetic, yet not supernatural. Some law, not
   This survey of the competing discussions of dreams suggests the real
   streams of scientific and spiritual dream theories, each with
   mirror Victorian cultural tensions and uncertainties; dreams become a
   debate, aware of both channels of thought, considered dreams to be
   George Henry Lewes reports that dreams were "a subject which always
   (72). Dickens owned several of the major studies of dreams, including
   actual view of dreams, however, is problematic, because his comments in
   scientific view over the supernatural. He parodies popular dreambooks
   in the essay "Dictionary Dreams," published in All the Year Round (31
   Own Dreambook and ridicules popular oneirocriticism (549-552). For
   instance, the narrator of the essay reads that "To dream of cucumbers
   be possible to cultivate such an auspicious dream by contemplating and
   passage he exhibits a classic scientific paradigm of dreams-caused by
   and start up suddenly from a terrific dream of a large church-clock
   funeral, even in your dream, you remember to have attended eighteen
   This passage seems well informed by scientific studies: the dreams
   not during it; the perception of time is warped during the dream, so
   that a brief moment of dreaming seems to contain an immense span of
   time; and the mind creates a dream to explain the sounds perceived
   during sleep. The second-person narration of this dream emphasizes its
   familiarity; this is the sort of dream, Dickens suggests, that anyone
   Dickens interpreted his own dreams from this scientific standpoint as
   vivid dream he had while in Italy with his family: the spirit of Mary
   any serious significance in the dream (or converting to Catholicism),
   not only familiar with the standard scientific explanations of dreams,
   but tended to accept them and apply them to his own dreams.
   Dreams were a recurring topic in his magazines, suggesting that the
   "Dreams" in Household Words (8 March 1851), and "A Physician's Dreams,"
   causes, types and meaning of dreams. The Household Words essayis more
   dreams, accept neither fully. In contrast to most scientific views of
   chiefly makes up our nightly dreams: "I would suggest that the
   dreams can be directly traced to any incidents of recent occurrence, it
   the time" (6.276-277). His own dreams, he states, are more often scenes
   fourteen years and had nine children, he never dreamed of them. He
   remarkable sameness" in our dreams, which are not, as Stone supposed,
   how many dreams are common to us all, from the Queen to the
   study of dreams, the letter also provides two interesting statements
   about his theory of dreams in literature. One suggests that dreams can
   were a thousand to one against anybody's dreaming of the subject
   discusses the use of dreams as a plot device: "The obvious convenience
   and effect of making the dreams of heroes and heroines bear on the
   dreams are, and what he creates in his fiction to represent a dream.
   the fever dreams which arise as recognizable medical symptoms in Bleak
   dream visions in A Christmas Carol and The Chimes on the other; in
   between we might place revelatory dreams which exist in a more or less
   dreams. Despite the useful metaphor of a line between two opposite
   points, though, even the scientifically explicable fever dreams contain
   dream episode. Dickens takes pains to construct around his dream
   the dreamer. In Martin Chuzzlewit, for instance, Montague Tigg has a
   named J. His dream may be a result of his waking thoughts and restless
   fears or evil conscience reproduced this door in all his dreams"
   The dream itself, however, follows the (conventionally literary)
   tradition that dreams are true revelations. Tigg's own ghost appears in
   the dream as "a man with a bloody smear upon his head" to reveal his
   of dreams is, of course, quite ancient, but the ambivalence continues
   discussion of and attitude toward dreams. Further exploration of how
   popular theories of dreams—which exist on the smudged boundaries of
   literary dreams would form an important contribution to the study of
   can we hope to understand the meaning of the literary dreams, rather
   Bernard, Catherine A. "Dickens and Victorian Dream Theory." Victorian
   Blair, Mrs. Dreams and Dreaming. London: G. Groombridge, 1843.
   Dendy, Walter C. On the Phenomena of Dreams and Other Transient
   "Dictionary Dreams." All the Year Round 5.123 (31 Aug., 1861): 549-52.
   "Dreams." Household Words 2.50 (8 March, 1851): 566-72.
   Freud, Sigmund. "Delusions and Dreams in Jensen's Gradiva." The
   ---. The Interpretation of Dreams. The Standard Edition of the Complete
   Grant, Alexander Henley. The Literature and Curiosities of Dreams.
   Physical Influence on the Mind, In the Production of Dreams, Visions,
   Nocturnal Revels; or, Universal Interpreter of Dreams and Visions.
   "A Physician's Dreams." All the Year Round 2.31 (26 Nov., 1859):
   Stoehr, Taylor. Dickens: The Dreamer's Stance. Ithaca: Cornell UP,
   Thomas, Ronald Robert. Dreams of Authority: Freud and the Fictions of
