   What Is Dreaming and What Does It Tell Us about Memory? [Excerpt]
   Dreams may play a role in memory incorporation and influence our
   Almost by definition, a dream is something you are aware of at some
   aren’t aware of it during sleep then it isn’t a dream. Many people will
   protest, “I never remember my dreams!,” but that is a different matter
   entirely. Failing to remember a dream later on when you’re awake
   We all intuitively know what a dream is, but you’ll be surprised to
   learn there’s no universally accepted definition of dreaming. One
   several different ways of rating, ranking, and scoring dreams. For
   example, one uses an eight-point rating system from 0 (no dream) to 7
   Physical Bases of Dreams
   Dreams also have a home. Neural activity in the primary sensory areas
   dream.
   Do Dreams Serve a Purpose?
   In contrast to an activation-synthesis model, which views dreams as
   scientists have suggested that dreams serve an important function. As
   function could be. Sigmund Freud’s suggestion that dreams express
   lots of other theories about what dreams might do, many with more
   simulation hypothesis suggests that dreams may provide a sort of
   situations, even if we don’t remember the dreams. Presumably, this
   dreams which include a threatening situation (more than 70 percent in
   incidence of threats in the dreamer’s actual daytime life. Furthermore,
   incidence of threat in their dreams. Reactions to these threats are
   Another suggestion is that dreams influence the way you feel the next
   people to remember the nastier dreams from their REM sleep definitely
   dreams which can wake you up) may even lead to ongoing mood problems.
   On the other hand, there is also evidence that dreams could help to
   regulate long-term mood. For instance, a study of dreams in divorced
   women showed that those who dreamed about their ex-husbands more often
   were better adapted to the divorce. Amazingly enough, dreams also seem
   dreams, felt less thirsty when they woke up.
   The content of dreams can be influenced in lots of different ways. For
   dreams if nice smells are wafted at them in REM sleep, and they have
   negative or unhappy dreams if stinky, unpleasant smells are sent their
   way. Some people can achieve lucid dreaming, in which they control the
   sequence of events in their dream, and evidence suggests that these
   nothing at all about the original evolved purpose of dreams) it
   which they have phobias into their dreams, and—when combined with more
   remove the phobia. Hypnotic suggestion can also make dreams more
   dreams. The fact that they can learn during sleep is a different
   matter, but dreams themselves don’t appear to be a good forum for
   even remember our dreams most of the time). Studies of language
   in REM, the dreams which are experienced during this extra REM don’t
   Memories in Dreams
   What’s the most recent dream you can remember? Was anyone you know in
   familiar? Most dreams incorporate fragments of experiences from our
   waking lives. It’s common to dream about disconnected snippets like a
   particular person, place, or activity. But do dreams ever replay
   fragments; studies the secret world of sleep of dreaming show that
   quite rare (around 2 percent of dreams contain such memories, according
   to one study). Most of our dreams just recombine fragments of waking
   and concerns of the dreamer. This means cyclists dream about cycling,
   teachers dream about teaching, and bankers dream about money.
   Some researchers have capitalized upon dream reports to gain insight
   residues appear in 65 to 70 percent of single dream reports. On the
   other hand, a more recently described phenomenon called the dream-lag
   be incorporated into dreams decreases steadily across the next few
   Thus, it is very common for memories to be incorporated into dreams on
   crash today, I’m likely to dream about it tonight). The likelihood of
   few memories incorporated into dreams three to five days after they
   be incorporated into a dream increases again on nights six and seven
   memories less likely to be incorporated into dreams three to five days
   true for people who report vivid dreams, and it also appears to only be
   true of REM dreams. As with most research, the dream-lag effect raises
   Why Do We Have Different Kinds of Dreams at Different Stages of the
   Dreams aren’t all the same. Everyone is aware of the difference between
   good and bad dreams, but we don’t tend to notice that some dreams are
   more logical and structured while others are more bizarre. Some dreams
   aren’t real, while others are fuzzy and indistinct. Some dreams are
   Dreams occur in all stages of sleep, but they seem to become
   mentioned above, dreams contain disconnected memory fragments: places
   organized in a structured and realistic way. The dreams that occur in
   non-REM sleep tend to be shorter but more cohesive than REM dreams, and
   dreams that occur early in the night often also reflect recent waking
   counterparts. Conversely, REM dreams that occur late in the night are
   difference between early and late-night dreams. The various elements of
   current dream are strongly active—but they don’t appear to be in
   disjointed properties of late-night (early morning) dreams.
   Irrespective of how it happens, it is clear that dreams not only replay
   heard more music in their dreams than your normal man-on-the-street but
   heard in waking life. They had created new music in their dreams!
   Although we don’t quite understand how dreams achieve this type of
   thinking could, in itself, be the true purpose of dreams. It is
