18 Common Dream Interpretations and What They Actually Mean
   Dreams can feel stunningly real, leave us shaken, and surprise us with
   dreams are actually the disguised representations of our unconscious
   what dreams are, what causes them, what they mean, and the benefit they
   Dreams” Stephanie Gailing explains. “Since antiquity, they have
   The act of trying to suss out the possible meaning of dreams can be
   century—and the birth of modern psychology—that dreams were seen as a
   dreams in order to better understand our overall well-being.
   Langone Health, breaks down dreams, which typically occur in the rapid
   minds, into three types: a pleasant dream with an ideal outcome, one
   nightmare. What these dreams mean is personal and can vary; it all
   depends on the dreamer.
   “Dreams can show us things that we are experiencing in waking life but
   Though the interpretation of dreams will be different for everyone,
   you're trying to figure out what you're own dreams might mean. Consider
   this your crash course in basic dream analysis—or, a handy little dream
   dreams and what they could mean for you.
Dreams of Being Pregnant
   Depending on what is going on in your life, being pregnant in a dream
   at the details of your dream to help flesh out the overall meaning.
   You’ll also want to explore how you’re feeling after the dream; she
   says your emotional reaction can provide insights into what the dream
   “For example, if you have a dream about being pregnant, and you have
   been working hard on a creative project, the dream may relate to this
   she explains. “It’s always important to take the dream into context of
Dreams of Falling
   If you’re dreaming about being in a free fall, Gailing says it could
   she says that if you find yourself falling in a dream but then start
Dreams of Being Chased
   Someone chasing you in your dreams is another sign that you might not
Dreams of Flying
   Whether you’re dreaming of flying like a bird or cos-playing your
   favorite Marvel superhero, Gailing says that the vivid dream of flying
   symbolizes freedom and a need for adventure. However if the dream turns
   remember to try to pay attention to what’s going on in the dream and
Dreams of Death
   An obvious reading, Gailing says, of dreaming about death is that it
Dreams of Your Teeth Falling Out
   One of the most common dreams people tend to have is one that involves
   teeth falling out. Gailing says that there are three main dream
Dreams of Being Late or Missing a Deadline
   These habits of tardiness showing up in your dreams usually shows some
Dreams of Being Naked in Public
   keep it moving, those embarrassed feelings may manifest in dreamland as
   you sleep. If you find yourself dreaming about being naked in public,
Dreams of Infidelity
   The good news: dreaming of infidelity isn’t necessarily a sign from the
   up. Maybe you’re having this dream because a partner has cheated on you
   than lash out over this particular dream.
Dreams of Phobias
   in your dreams? Gailing says that if you’re dreaming of your phobias,
Dreams of Your Ex
   Don’t let the TikTok tarot cards fool you: a dream about your ex isn’t
   surrounding that dream. “Were you thrilled, horrified, or puzzled that
   your ex starred in your dream? Also, what’s your relationship with your
   important here in understanding what the dream is revealing,” says
   Once you process your feelings about the dream (and your ex), you can
   “What do you want to do about [the dream]?” asks Gallagher. “Sometimes
Dreams that Feel Like a Premonition
   Better known as precognitive dreams, Gailing says, “These are the ones
   in which you dream of an event that has yet to occur, only for it to
   future through their dreams while others don’t sense that their dreams
   are precognitive until after an event that they dreamed about occurs.”
   But not every dream is a precognitive dream and you shouldn’t live in
   Instead, she says to just take note of times when your dreams come into
Dreams of Seeing a Loved One Who Has Passed Away
   When Gallagher’s sister passed and visited her in a dream, Gallagher
   connect with someone you've lost in a dream,” she says. “It was such a
   beautiful experience to have this kind of dream with my sister in it.”
   loved one in your dreams, Gallagher recommends working through those
   prove to be a meaningful moment of reflection and insight. “Dreams
   dreams,” she says. “I think that can be a beautiful thing.”
Dreams of Your Losing Hair
   Gailing says that dreams of losing one’s hair may be linked to some
Dreams of Fires
   Dreaming about fires has a wide range of meanings. One of the most
Dreams of Drowning
Dreams of Snakes
   dream about a snake, it may be because you’re in a powerful time of
   nightmare. But Gallagher says that if you’re having recurring dreams of
   their own dreams to keep a dream journal; this will help recall the
   dreams and make sense of what they might mean to you in the present
   dream journal offers you a deeper level of understanding about yourself
   and/or the world around you,” explains Gailing. “Even if a dream is
   think that opening up to our dreams can leave us in awe and inspire us
What is the most common dream?
   Gailing says that she hasn’t come across a singular dream that most
What does a recurring dream mean?
   It’s pretty common to have a recurring dream, says Gailing. This can
   dreams may be the reliving of the traumatic experiences while one
   therapist or dream interpreter to discuss it and see what meaning it
   she says. “If there is resolve, then the dream may not appear as
Why do people dream?
   to. Gailing says there are many theories on why we dream, such as our
   dreams are ways our spirits and ancestors communicate with us. But just
   as the meaning of our dreams is dependent on our experiences and
   feelings, why we dream in the first place might be a personal answer
