Philosophy of Dreaming
   questions about dreaming:
   1. How can I be sure I am not always dreaming?
   2. Can I be immoral in dreams?
   3. Are dreams conscious experiences that occur during sleep?
   4. Does dreaming have an evolutionary function?
   about dreams:
   5. Is dreaming an ideal scientific model for consciousness research?
   6. Is dreaming an instance of hallucinating or imagining?
   about the external world. How can I be sure I am not always dreaming,
   or dreaming right now? Philosophers have typically looked for features
   that distinguish dreams from waking life and one key debate centres on
   whether it is possible to feel pain in a dream.
   Section 2 surveys the ethics of dreaming. The classical view of
   Ethicist. The notion of lucid dreaming is examined here in light of the
   question of responsibility during dreaming and how we treat other dream
   replies to question 3: the debate about whether dreaming is, or is not,
   dreaming as a consciously experienced state. Malcolm argues that the
   concept of dreaming is incoherent, while Dennett puts forward a theory
   of dreaming without appealing to consciousness.
   has shaped dreaming, if at all. Early approaches by Freud and Jung are
   Freud, Jung and Revonsuo have argued that dreaming is functional,
   Flanagan represents a view shared by many neuroscientists that dreaming
   edge issue of precisely how dreaming should be integrated into the
   research program of consciousness. Should dreaming be taken as a
   scientific model of consciousness? Might dreaming play another role
   raises a question of the exact qualitative nature of dreaming, has a
   that dream imagery is perceptual (hallucinatory), and reasons favouring
   the philosophical challenge to that orthodoxy, that dreams are
    1. Dreaming in Epistemology
         1. Descartes’ Dream Argument
    2. The Ethics of Dreaming
         1. Saint Augustine on the Morality of Dreaming
         2. Consequentialist vs. Deontological Positions on Dreaming
         3. Virtue Ethics of Dreaming
    3. Are Dreams Consciously Experienced?
         1. The Received View of Dreaming
              1. The Impossibility of Verifying Dream Reports
              2. The Conflicting Definitions of “Sleep” and “Dreaming”
              1. Putnam on the Conceptual Analysis of Dreaming
              1. A New Model of Dreaming: Uploading Unconscious Content
              2. Accounting for New Data on Dreams: “Precognitive” Dreams
              1. Lucid Dreaming
              2. Alternative Explanations for “Precognitive” Dreams
    4. The Function of Dreaming
    5. Dreaming in Contemporary Philosophy of Mind and Consciousness
         1. Should Dreaming Be a Scientific Model?
              1. Dreaming as a Model of Consciousness
              2. Dreaming as a Contrast Case for Waking Consciousness
         2. Is Dreaming an Instance of Images or Percepts?
              1. Dreaming as Hallucination
              2. Dreaming as Imagination
1. Dreaming in Epistemology
a. Descartes’ Dream Argument
   has been deceived before in dreams where he has similarly been
   he was only dreaming that he was seated by a fire. How can I know that
   I am not now dreaming? is the resulting famous question Descartes asked
   to the sensory deception of dreams, Descartes believes that we cannot
   The phenomenon of dreaming is used as key evidence for the sceptical
   false and generated by a dream. Descartes holds the common-sense view
   that dreams, which regularly occur in all people, are a sequence of
   come to be labelled as the “received view” of dreaming). A dream makes
   it feel as though the dreamer is carrying out actions in waking life,
   for during a dream we do not realize that it is a dream we are
   experiencing. Descartes claims that the experience of a dream could in
   subjective differences there are between waking life and dreaming, they
   dreaming. Descartes is left unsure that the objects in front of him are
   real – whether he is dreaming of their existence or whether they really
   are there. Dreaming was the first source for motivating Descartes’
   Descartes’ dream argument began with the claim that dreams and waking
   sufficient similarity between the two experiences for dreamers to be
   experiences while we are actually asleep and dreaming.  The dream
   dream experiences in order to gain certainty in their belief that they
   are not now dreaming.
   consciousness from dreaming. Hobbes believed that an absence of the
   absurdity of their dreams to be able to distinguish their states, an
   longer there during wakefulness. Locke compared real pain to dream
   pain. He asks Descartes to consider the difference between dreaming of
   dreams as we do in waking life. His claim, if true, undermines
   dreaming from waking life such that we could ever be sure we are in one
   Descartes thought that dreams are protean (Hill, 2004b). By “protean”,
   Hill means that dream experience can replicate the panoply of any
   (and thereby be phenomenally indistinguishable) in dreams. This protean
   waking life which simply could not occur during dreaming, then, in that
   external world, rather than dreaming. Locke alleged that he had found a
   gap in this protean claim: we do not and cannot feel pain in dreams.
   The notion of pain occurring in a dream has now been put to the test in
   content of dream diaries in the case of ordinary dreams and also by
   participating lucid dreamers. The conclusion reached independently by
   can occur in dreams, though they are rare (Zadra, and others 1998;
   fire) might not be possible in dreams. The empirical work supports
   Descartes’ conviction that dreams can recapitulate any waking state,
   dreaming thereby ruling out certainty that this is not now a dream.
   Another common attempt to distinguish waking life from dreaming is the
   not asleep dreaming if we can connect our current experiences to the
   absurdity as a key feature of dreams. Though dreams do have a tendency
   could wake with a dream connecting to the overall course of our lives.
   dreaming from waking life, though the claim that this ought to
   For an alternative response to Descartes’ sceptical dream argument see
   Sosa (2007), who says that “in dreaming we do not really believe; we
   only make-believe.” He argues that in dreaming we actually only ever
   both dreaming and waking life. Of course, if I have never believed, in
   then none of my dreams challenge the perceptual and introspective
   that in dreams we imagine scenarios (rather than believe we are engaged
   dreams trade in imaginings rather than beliefs, the dreams still create
   when we think we are on the sole basis that we imagine our dream
   imagining during dreaming and so scepticism is not avoided, so Ichikawa
2. The Ethics of Dreaming
   responsibility of dreaming has been centred on sleep walking, where
   dreams. Does the notion of right and wrong apply to dreams themselves,
a. Saint Augustine on the Morality of Dreaming
   about some of the actions he carried out in dreams. For somebody who
   devoted his life to celibacy, his sexual dreams of fornication worried
   dreams he seems to have little control over committing the acts that he
   character of his dreams. In trying to solve the problem Augustine
   dreaming life. He draws a crucial distinction between “happenings” and
   “actions.” Dreams fall into the former category. Augustine was not
   agency from dreaming, we cannot be responsible for what happens in our
   dreams. As a result, the notion of sin or moral responsibility cannot
   be applied to our dreams (Flanagan, 2000: p.18; pp. 179 – 183).
   committed to the claim that all events that occur in dreams are
   brought into question by lucid dreams which seem to involve genuine
   actions and decision making processes whereby dreaming individuals can
   control, affect and alter the course of the dream. The success of
   Augustine’s argument hinges on there being no actions in dreams. Lucid
   dreaming is therefore evidence against this premise. We have now seen
   Augustine’s argument that moral notions never apply to dreams fail
   the issue of right and wrong in dreams.
b. Consequentialist vs. Deontological Positions on Dreaming
   Dreaming is an instance of a more general concern about a subset of
   behaviour We seem to carry out actions during dreams in simulated
   whether we are morally responsible for actions in dreams. More
   they would be grossly wrong? Dreaming is perhaps a special instance
   because in ordinary dreams we believe we are carrying out actions in
   with the assumption in place that what we do in dreams does not affect
   whether dreams, fantasies and video games are really without
   Consequentialist is not arguing that dreams do not have any
   Consequentialist theories may well argue that, provided that dreams
   “harm” other dream characters, even in lucid dreaming. The more liberal
   such lucid dreams makes me nicer to people in waking life, then the
   Consequentialists will grant their argument even though dream content
   has an intentional relation to other people. Namely, dreams can often
   about that particular individual. Dreams are not always about people
   state of affairs. Since dreams are often actually about real people, I
   their “dream representative”. The basic Deontological maxim to treat
   dreams.
   carry out otherwise immoral acts on dream characters with general
   unhappy with the notion that in dreams one crucial element of singular
   content remains – we represent ourselves in dreams. The
   being different from dreams. Fantasies are actions, where I sit down
   and decide to indulge my daydreams, whereas dreams might be more
   to an end if I am just passively dreaming whereas I am if I start
   only applies to lucid dreaming, where Augustine’s distinction would
   still be at work. This might exempt a large number of dreams from being
c. Virtue Ethics of Dreaming
   develop that individual’s character. Where might dreaming fit in with
   immoral dreams?” needs to be opened up to: “what can I get out of
   dreaming to help me acquire virtuousness?”
   The Virtue Ethics of dreaming might be pursued in a Freudian or Jungian
   vein. Dreams arguably put us in touch with our unconscious and
   “[I]t is in the world of dreaming that the unconscious is working out
   motivate most of our behavior Once we become sensitive to dreams, we
   discover that every dynamic in a dream is manifesting itself in some
   “Studying our own dreams can be valuable in all sorts of ways. They can
   we owe it to ourselves to recall and pay attention to our dreams.
   However, this line of argument relies on the claim that dreams really
   controversial: dream analysis of any kind lacks scientific status and
   a further question of whether dreams should be used in therapy.
   dreams. Dreams, as unconsciously instantiated, capture patterns of
   this is the process by which people learn to lucid dream. By
   thinking eventually occurs in dreams. By constantly asking “am I
   awake?” in the day it becomes more likely to ask oneself in a dream, to
   1991). With the possibility that dreams do capture waking life thinking
   and the notion that one can learn to lucid dream one may ask whether
   Augustine tried his hardest at stopping the dreams that troubled him
   Ordinary dreams are commonly thought to not actually involve choices
   and corresponding agency. Lucid dreaming invokes our ability to make
   choices, often to the same extent as in waking life. Lucid dreaming
   dreamers (popular manuals on how to lucid dream are sold and actively
   the content of the dreams, the Virtue Ethicist will likely be more
   interested in dreaming as an overall activity and how it fits in with
   dreaming. Though humans are thought to be moral agents, we spend a
   third of our lives asleep. 11% of our mental experiences are dreams
   (Love, 2013: p.2). The dreams we experience during sleep are mostly
   our lives. LaBerge argues that by not cultivating lucid dreams, we miss
   dreaming. One could object that the dreamer should just get on with
   life in the real world. After all, learning to lucid dream for most
   their dreams for periods of time in their waking life. They could be
   Similarly, the lucid dreamer is achieving fulfilment and nurturing
   important long term traits and habits. By gaining control of dreams,
   representing them in dreams. Lucid dreams might aid in getting an
   the scenario in waking life). Lucid dreams may then help to play a role
   courage, bravery, wisdom, and so forth. Lucid dreaming helps in
   then, lucid dreaming signifies an expansion of agency.
3. Are Dreams Consciously Experienced?
a. The Received View of Dreaming
   There is an implicit, unquestioned commitment in both Descartes’ dream
   argument and Augustine’s argument on the morality of dreaming. This is
   the received view, which is the platitudinous claim that a dream is a
   typically adheres to a number of further claims: that dreams play out
   approximately in real time and do not happen in a flash. When a dream
   is successfully remembered, the content of the dream is to a large
   individual’s dream report is taken as excellent evidence for that dream
   of a dream, but I will not wake up and believe I had a dream involving
   view is not committed to a claim about exactly how long a dream takes
   dreams cannot occur instantaneously during sleep. The received view is
   committed to the claim that dreams are extended in time during sleep.
   dream content on the received view might show A – G occurring much
   can represent any dream that people ordinarily recall
   We can appear to carry out a scope of actions in our dreams pretty
   life, we can also do in dreams. The exact same mental states can occur
   in dreams just as they do in waking life. We can believe, judge, reason
   and converse with what we take to be other individuals in our dreams.
   Since we can be frightened in a dream we can be frightened during
   The received view is attested by reports of dreams from ordinary people
   in laboratory and everyday settings. Every dreamer portrays the dream
   as the nature of mental states. When it comes to dreaming, the
   that dreams are experiences that occur during sleep.
   claims about dreams that Descartes, Augustine and the majority of
   three arguments: #1 dream reports are unverifiable; #2 sleep and
   dreaming have conflicting definitions; #3 communication and judgements
i. The Impossibility of Verifying Dream Reports
   According to Malcolm’s first argument, we should not simply take dream
   reports at face value, as the received view has done; dream reports are
   insufficient to believe the metaphysical claim that dreaming
   sleeping to examine our episodic memories of dreams and put our dream
   report into words, these are not the dream experiences themselves.
   primary claim that dreams are consciously experienced during sleep.
   establishing that one has had a dream is that one awakes with the
   impression of having dreamt (that is, an apparent memory) and that one
   then goes on to report the dream. Waking with the impression does not
   corresponds to the report. Malcolm views dream reports as inherently
   first personal and repeatedly claims that the verbal report of a dream
   is the only criterion for believing that a dream took place. He adds
   that dreams cannot be checked in any other way without either showing
   of dreaming by relying on behavioural criteria such as patterns of
   their dreams, according to Malcolm. The best we can get from that are
   If scientists try to show that one is dreaming during sleep then those
   scientists have invoked a new conception of dreaming that does not
   into dreaming because the real conception of dreaming has only ever
   relied on dream reports. A dream is logically inseparable from the
   dream report and it cannot be assumed that the report refers to an
   claim that “I dreamed that I was flying” entails that I had an
   is no way of conclusively confirming the idea that dreaming occurs
   there is no way of finding out if the memory of a dream corresponds to
   the dream as it actually occurred (Wittgenstein, 1953: part 2, § vii;
   especially bad memory. How can we trust his reports of dreams? The
   dreams we recall the same content of the earlier experience. But
   In drawing attention to empirical work on dreams, Malcolm says that
   psychologists have come to be uncertain whether dreams occur during
   Hence the question “when, in his sleep, did he dream?” is senseless.
   There is also a lack of criterion for the duration of dreams, that is
   time of occurrence of a dream and also how long a dream might last has
   no application in ordinary conversation about dreams. “In this sense, a
   dream is not an ‘occurrence’ and, therefore, not an occurrence during
   metaphysical result, namely, that dreaming does not take place in time
   language has misled us into believing that dreams occur during sleep;
   “dreams” do not refer to anything over and above the waking report,
   “dreaming” is an exemplar of Wittgenstein’s idea of prejudices
ii. The Conflicting Definitions of “Sleep” and “Dreaming”
   contradicting itself and so the claim that dreams could consciously
   whereas dreaming is said to involve conscious experience. Experience
   the claim that dreams could occur during sleep implies consciousness
   contradiction. This alleged contradiction of sleep and dreaming
   supports Malcolm’s first argument that dreams are unverifiable because
   any attempt to verify the dream report will just show that the
   individual was not asleep and so there is no way to verify that dreams
   content of a dream report could coincide well with a publicly
   individual slept and thunder in the reported dream later. Malcolm
   conceptions of sleep and dreaming. By “sleep” Malcolm thinks that
   sleep, essentially closing off dreams as things we can know anything
   about. This third argument supports the first argument that dreams are
   able to report a dream as it occurs, thereby verifying it as a
   alleges, the dream report fails Wittgensteinian criteria of being
   definitions of sleep and dreaming are in contradiction. There is
   judge that one is asleep and dreaming. If Malcolm’s argument about the
   when he raised the following issue: due to the similarity of dreams and
   waking experiences, my apparent waking experience might be a dream now
   premise for Descartes is that a dream is a sequence of experiences, the
   dreams are not experiences at all. If the received view is
   experiences to dreams: “if one cannot have thoughts while sound asleep,
i. Putnam on the Conceptual Analysis of Dreaming
   researchers have invoked new conceptions of sleep and dreaming (without
   dreaming as the received view understands the concept of dreaming. This
   dreaming. Instead of relying on an individual’s waking report
   physiological criteria that the individual is asleep and dreaming. For
   and “dreaming” which only resembles the old one. Putnam objects to
   about new ways of verifying the existence of dreams. If Putnam’s attack
   is successful then the work that scientists are doing on dreaming is
   about dreaming as the received view understands the concept, namely,
   scientists are not invoking a new conception of sleep and dreaming,
   then we can find other ways to verify our understanding of dreaming and
   to say, an individual can be asleep and dreaming.
   of dreaming can be gripping and the individual’s critical reasoning
   poor enough to be deceived into believing his dream is reality; most
   later dream report because it detracted from their being fully asleep
   The apparent contradiction in sleep and dreaming that Malcolm claims
   individual is dreaming and yet asleep. Some dream content, as reported
   same time as the dream. Malcolm calls this faint perception (Malcolm,
   framework, to account for such dreams. For example, if there is thunder
   outside and an individual is asleep he might dream of being struck by
   example. Malcolm argued that such dreams are examples of individuals
i. A New Model of Dreaming: Uploading Unconscious Content
   Dennett begins his attack on the received view of dreaming (the set of
   claims about dreams being consciously experienced during sleep) by
   dreaming. He is flexible in his approach and considers variations of
   dreaming. Dennett does not say much about how this processing of
   was. Dennett is not repeating Malcolm’s first argument that dreaming is
   the received view’s own claim that dreams involve conscious
   On the received view, the memory of an earlier dream is caused by the
   earlier dream experience and is the second time the content is
   experienced. On Dennett’s model, dream recall is the first time the
   content is experienced. Why believe that dreaming involves a lack of
   reports of dream content. An individual with predominantly horizontal
   match in their dream. Dennett accommodates these (at the time)
   us back to the received view – that the content of the dream does occur
   have proof that the individual is aware of the content of the dream
   between dream content reported and the direction of eye movement. Both
   sides of the debate agree that when dream content is being prepared
   Dennett also considers possibilities where the content of dream recall
   point that the data of dream reports alone will not decide between
   further evidence of a specific type of dream report that might decide
ii. Accounting for New Data on Dreams: “Precognitive” Dreams
   Dennett believes that there exists certain dream reports which the
   exists anecdotal evidence that seems to suggest that dreams are
   Maury, who dreamt for some time of taking part in the French
   was about to be cut off in the dream, he woke up with the headboard
   This anecdotal type of dream is well documented in films – one dreams
   Dennett’s own anecdotal example, he recalls dreaming for some time of
   that dreams, that is, conscious experiences, occur whilst an individual
   content from the dream. But the anecdotes pose a potentially fatal
   problem for the received view because the entire content of the dream
   anecdotes make dreams look more like spontaneous imaginings on waking
   of other anecdotal examples that imply that the narrative to dreams is
   triggered retrospectively, after waking. The content of the dream
   more plausible account of dreaming. Any attempt to suggest that
   individuals have premonitions about the near future from dreams would
   on the moment of waking. This theory allows for two ways of dreaming to
   first way: dreams play out similar to the received view, only
   uploaded by the unconscious and woven together to create the dream
   During sleep the content of the dream is gathered together by the
   like anything to dream, although it is like something to have dreamed”
   was the content for that dream even being prepared (though it might
   Dennett also alludes to a library in the brain of undreamed dreams with
   uploading through association – it may have been a dream involving
   could have had a dream about going to his local job centre and being
   experience – the memory of a dream is first experienced consciously
   nothing it is like to have a dream during sleep, then the recall of
   dreams does not refer to any experience that occurred during sleep.
i. Lucid Dreaming
   It might seem that lucid dreaming is an immediate objection to Malcolm
   and Dennett’s arguments against the received view. Lucid dreaming
   occurs when an individual is aware during a dream that it is a dream.
   Lucid dreaming is therefore an example of experiencing a dream whilst
   one is asleep, therefore dreams must be experiences that occur during
   dreaming does not really occur. For, the waking impression might
   contain “the literary conceit of a dream within a dream” (Dennett:
   1976, p.161). The recalled dream might just have content where it seems
   as though the individual is aware they are having a dream. Even this
   reports having had a lucid dream is aware of the dream at the time.
   Stephen LaBerge. LaBerge asked individuals who could lucid dream to
   voluntarily communicate with him in their lucid dreams by using the
   match in content of the dream to the direction of eye movements,
   movements. One might think that if lucid dreaming is really occurring,
   and the direction of REM might be linked to the content of the dream as
   lucid dream (that stands out from random eye movement) in order to test
   the fact that they are having a dream and aware that they are having a
   dream (see figure below).
   In figure 4 above, the graph correlates with the reported dream
   content. The participant wakes and gives a dream report which matches
   (1, LRLR). He then flew about in his dream, until 2, where he signalled
   content might match the content of the dream (and that lucid dreaming
   participants to do something in their dream (upon onset of lucidity)
   dream report and his claim that individuals could never communicate
   impression and the dream itself are logically separable. We need an
   study is that communication can arguably occur from within the dream
   conscious experiences at the same time. The content of the dream occurs
   out dreaming experience as verifiable as any other waking state.
   uncontroversially. Much dream content really does occur during sleep
   is right to think that the content of dreams does occur during sleep
   and that the dream content during sleep matches the memory of dream
   influenced the dream content and thereby influenced eye movement
   through an act of agency within the dream.
   from within the dream without the individual waking up in any way,
   thereby confirming the received view. The content of the dream occurs
   really does match up with the content of the dream as reported after
   challenges Malcolm’s claim that dreams cannot be communicated and were
   in the dream in the pre-arranged manner. If, according to Dennett’s
   LaBerge carried out a further experiment in which the timing of dreams
   was measured from within the dream. The experiment used lucid dreamers
   dream and then made the eye signal again. They were also asked to
   LaBerge has concluded from his experiments that experience in dreams
   There is still room for scepticism towards dreams being consciously
   say that lucid dreams are a special, anomalous case that does not apply
   to ordinary dreaming. Indeed, there is evidence that different parts of
   dreaming (pre-frontal brain regions, pre-cuneus and front polar
   regions). So there still remains the possibility that lucid dreaming is
   an example of consciously “waking up within a dream” whilst ordinary
   dreams are taken care of entirely by the unconscious (thus there is not
   anything-it’s-like to have an ordinary dream occur during sleep). It
   might be useful to look at one report of the memory of a lucid dream:
   dreams. Finally, it dawns on me: I must be dreaming! (LaBerge &
   Notice that this is not just the memory-report of a lucid dream.
   Rather, it is the memory-report of an ordinary dream turning into a
   lucid dream. The report demonstrates an epistemic transition within the
   dream. With this in mind, it is difficult to maintain that lucid dreams
   are anomalous, or that lucid dreams bring about conscious experience.
   thus accept that the preceding ordinary dream is conscious too because
   whenever individuals gain lucidity in their dreams, there is a prior
   process of gradual realization that is present in the dream report.
   When an individual acquires lucidity in a dream, they are arguably
   The gradual transition from ordinary dream to lucid dream can be more
   fully emphasized. It is possible to question oneself in a dream whilst
   awake and ask another dream character to hit oneself, apparently feel
   highlight the existence of partial-lucid dreams in order to show that
   dreams often involve irrationality and that there are fine-grained
   transitions to the fuller lucidity of critical thinking in dreams. A
   lucid dream, unlike ordinary dreams, is defined strictly in terms of
   the advanced epistemic status of the dreamer – the individual is having
   a lucid dream if they are aware that he or she is dreaming (Green,
   1968: p.15). Lucid dreaming is defined in the weak sense as awareness
   that one is dreaming. Defined more strongly, lucid dreams involve
   individuals can come close to realizing they are dreaming and miss out
   – they might dream about the nature of dreaming or lucid dreaming
   without realizing that they are currently in a dream themselves. Hence
   the norms of logical inference do not apply to ordinary dreams. One
   might look around in one’s dream and think “I must remember the people
   in this dream for my dream journal” without inferring that one is in a
   dream and acquiring lucidity. In another dream an individual might
   dream, something they have learned just as soon as they wake up. In a
   dream, the dreamer could be accused by dream character Y of carrying
   out an action A – the dreamer thinks “I must wake up to tell Y that I
   did not carry out this action.” Implicitly, the dreamer knows it is a
   dream to make sense of the belief that they need to wake up, but they
   their dream representative. The dream here involves awareness of the
   dream state without controllability over the dream (for they still seem
   another type of common, partial-lucid dream in which people wake up
   from a dream and are able to return to it upon sleeping and change the
   course of the dream. This type of dream seems to involve
   treat it as an acknowledged dream but are able to have much more
   control over the content than usual. Lucid dreamers used in
   experimental settings are much more experienced and have lucid dreams
   in the strongest sense – they are aware they are dreaming (and can
   lucid dreaming challenges Augustine’s idea that dreams are not actions.
   lucid dreaming, then it might be the case that even ordinary dreams
   possibility to test the claim that somebody who is dreaming cannot tell
   dreaming and waking experiences are inherently indistinguishable.
   would say that someone who is dreaming might be able unable to
   we must be in an awake state. Had Descartes been a lucid dreamer, then
   now seated by the fire but I have also been deceived in dreams into
   realized that I was just dreaming when apparently seated by the fire
   people rarely have lucid dreams. If people lucidly dreamt much more
   often, then Descartes’ sceptical dream argument would have had little
   to motivate it. Work on communicative lucid dreaming might also open up
ii. Alternative Explanations for “Precognitive” Dreams
   Dennett had cited an interesting type of dream report where the ending
   of the dream was strongly implied by the stimulus of awakening. For
   example: having a dream of getting married end with the sound of church
   seemingly precognitive dreams are sometimes referred to in the
   extra evidence for Dennett’s proposed paradigm shift of dreaming. On
   the other hand, if there is enough evidence to claim that dreams are
   consciously experienced during sleep then the anecdotal data of dreams
   paradigm shift in our thinking about dreams. The biggest challenge the
   overriding the actual content of the dream does occur, but these
   Though LaBerge’s experiments suggest that the content of dreams
   insufficient to draw the conclusion that all dreams occur during sleep.
   with either creating a dream world on the received view or a dream
   dream’s anticipation (and symbolic representation) of this need be
   being impartial in his treatment of dreams, and his argument begs the
   dreaming to be inferior to his own theory by assuming that thought in
   dreaming is completely oblivious to the banalities of the future.
   of Maury in the first chapter of his Interpretation of Dreams). Maury
   Maury’s could thus be a type of dreaming involving self-fulfilling
   represented differently in the dream. Maury would have had enough time
   the dream.
   backfires outside and an individual wakes up with the memory of a dream
   The hard anecdotes reveal that the dreamer has no idea what will wake
   incorporated into the dream. The only hard anecdote mentioned in
   rather than representing a genuine example of a dream. Notice that a
   woke with a dream which seemed to anticipate the alarm going off at the
   set time (for example, had Dennett’s goat dream occurred despite his
   alarm not going off) then we might do best to conclude that the dream
   investigating. If a survey found that hard anecdote-like dreams (such
   as a truck back-firing and waking with a dream thematically similar)
   find a way to make room for such dreams.
   The anecdotes are a specific subclass of prophetic dreams. It is worth
   noting a related issue about dreams which are alleged to have a more
   one was to have had a dream about a plane crash the night before (or
   dream. Or one might dream of a relative or celebrity dying and then
   occurrence of a dream being loosely (or even exactly) about an
   dreams – a lifetime to generate one or two coincidences. The dreams
   prophetic dreams are over-reported. The probability of having a dream
   that a single individual has many dreams over a lifetime. Big events
   increases the probability that someone will have a dream with similar
   attacked some people just so happened to have dreams about plane
   crashes, and a few might have even had dreams more or less related to
   dreams would have been generated the night prior, as they are every
   where someone pays attention to the content of the dream and forgets
   anecdote-like dreams is currently uncertain, though they can be
4. The Function of Dreaming
   The function of dreaming – exactly why we dream and what purpose it
   Although the question of what dreaming might do for us has to this day
   theories. The most sustained first attempt to account for why we dream
   neuro-biological literature: that dreaming is an evolutionary
   by-product. On this view, dreaming has no function but comes as a side
   contemporary theory opposing the view that dreaming has no function, in
   comparison, holds that dreaming is a highly advantageous state where
   the content of the dream aids an organism in later waking behaviour
   dreams as a key source of insight into, and the main method of opening
   Therapy often involves in depth analyses of patient’s dreams. In order
   to analyse dreams though, Freudian psychoanalysis is committed to an
   assumption that dreams are fulfilling a certain function. Freud
   explicitly put forward a theory of the function of dreams. He believed
   that dreams have not been culturally generated by humans, as Malcolm
   world but remains instinctual. The psychoanalytic take on dreaming is
   alive. The super-ego is mostly unconscious. In the case of dreams, the
   the unconscious constantly struggles to become conscious. Dreams are an
   Dreaming is an opportunity for the desires of the id to be satisfied
   The super-ego finds various ways of censoring a dream and fulfilling
   misdirected. What we recall of dreams is further distorted as
   dream. The resulting dream is always a compromise between disguise and
   displaced onto other objects. Dreams are woven together in a story-like
   element to further absorb the dreamer in the manifest content.
   stories in order to stop the dreamer from awakening in horror
   (Flanagan: 2000, p.43). The content of the dream, even with some
   interested in what the patient thought the dream was about (that is,
   the memory of the dream) rather than the actual experience (Malcolm,
   Though Freud was not an evolutionary biologist, his theory of dreams
   thought that we dream in the way we do because it aids individuals in
   Individuals who dreamt in a significantly different way would not have
   survived and reproduced, and their way of dreaming would have died with
   them. But how does dreaming help individuals to survive? Freud
   postulates that dreaming simultaneously serves two functions. The
   Freud separates the dream into manifest and latent content. The
   at the surface level (a dream of travelling on a train as it goes
   intercourse with somebody that will land the dreaming individual in
   What about dreams where the manifest content seems to be emotionally
   painful, distressing, or a good example of an anxiety dream, rather
   these can be examples where the dream fails to properly disguise the
   of an early study which suggested that dream content is biased towards
   carries the wish and dreams are distorted by a psychological censor
   then the desire will remain unsuppressed. Perhaps dreams operate with
   fulfilment might be carried out in the form of an anxiety dream where
   the desire is especially disturbing if realized. Other anxiety dreams
   uses an example of one of his own dreams where a patient is infected
   not cure her (the dream of Irma’s injection). The dream allowed the
   dream, the wish for the alleviation guilt was fulfilled.
   The dream for Freudians relies on a distinction between indicative and
   desire that it will snow. A dream is an instance of an indicative
   desire. We see something in a dream and believe it is there in front of
   theories of dreams will not please all scholars and practitioners that
   caricaturing Jung’s theory of dreams, the differences in their views
   Like Freud, Jung also believed that dream analysis is a major way of
   Jung’s evolutionary story of dreaming differs from Freud’s. Whereas
   Freud understood dreams as using memory from the days preceding the
   dream (particularly the “day residue” of the day immediately leading up
   to the dream) and earlier childhood experiences, Jung thought the dream
   unconscious is especially pronounced in dreaming where universal
   further work to think about the dream, thereby hinting at future
   perspectives one may take toward oneself and one’s dreams (Mathers,
   Jung saw dreaming as playing an integral role in the overall
   during the process of dreaming the day’s experiences are connected to
   thought that the adaptive advantage to dreams was to distract us and
   order to dream and dreaming serves multiple functions. What does
   dreaming do for us, according to Jung? Dreams compensate for imbalances
   in the conscious attitudes of the dreamer. Psychology depends upon the
   interplay of opposites (Jung, 1968: p.47). By dreaming of opposite
   strong thinking function) having dreams which are much more
   feeling–based, the balance is restored (Stevens, 1994: p.106). “Dreams
   setting. Dreaming also carries out a more general type of compensation,
   androgynous and so dreams provide an opportunity to balance the overall
   and mind. Hence dreams are not the mere “guardians of sleep” as Freud
   result (Jung, 1968: p.37). Dreams serve up unconscious content that has
   emphasized an objective element to dreaming (that the unconscious often
   to the possibility of a fixed dream dictionary because the meaning of
   symbols will change depending on the dreamer and over time as they
   latent content, though he did encourage the dreamer to give their own
   dream imagery, what Freud called the manifest content, is what will
   reveal the meaning of the dream. Where Freud had asked “What is the
   dream trying to hide?” Jung asks: “What is the dream trying to express
   or communicate?” because dreams occur without a censor: they are
   Another function of dreaming that distinguishes Jung’s from Freud’s
   account is that dreams provide images of the possibilities the future
   may have in store for the sleeping individual. Not that dreams are
   human character that are common to us all (Johnson, 2009: p.46). Dreams
   events to past experience is where dreams are especially functional
   But whereas Freud assessed dreams in terms of looking back into the
   past, especially the antagonisms of childhood experience, dreaming for
   Dreaming for Jung is like “dreaming” in the other sense – that of
   aspiring, wishing and hoping. Dreams point towards our future
   brought about by dreaming might depend upon regularly recalling a
   dream, which is something that Freud’s claim of wish fulfilment need
   dreaming.
   Dreams are a special instance of the collective unconscious at work,
   individual psyche” (Johnson, 2009: p.46). Dreams demonstrate how the
   2009: p.4). The most important function of dreams is teaching us how to
   Dreams always have a multiplicity of meanings, can be re-interpreted
   much harder to construe Jung’s theory of dreams as adhering to the
   dreams. The dream images are generated by homologous neural structures
   Lamarckism by arguing that dreams involve inherited patterns of
   To rehearse the differences: Freud believed that dreams are the result
   and eventually and occasionally recollect; dreams are a distraction to
   keep us asleep; dreaming is a mechanism that has been selected to
   provide social stability amongst individuals. Dreams essentially deal
   with one’s relationship to their past. Jung thought dreams point
   to keep the individual at a psychological homeostasis. Dreams do not
   Flanagan represents a nuanced position in which dreaming has no
   fitness-enhancing effects on an organism that dreams, but neither does
   it detract from their fitness. Dreams are the by-products of sleep. The
   might dreams be such spandrels, lodged in between thought and sleep?
   fitness-enhancing function of dreaming. Though, as a matter of
   structure, we cannot avoid dreaming for dreams sit in between the
   argument is that in evolutionary biological terms, dreaming is not for
   2000: p.108). Dreaming neither serves the function of wish-fulfilment
   nature of dreaming, something which can clearly be appealed to given
   any individual’s experience of dreams. To be sure, wish-fulfilment and
   apparent psychological compensation sometimes appear in dreams, but
   for the view that dreams are spandrels is that, unlike for sleep, there
   is nothing close to an ideal adaptation explanation for dreaming
   dreaming is more plausible, then, because trying to argue that dreams
   dreaming is an adaptation. He also stands in opposition to Freud and
   Jung in that the function of dreams is not to deliver wish fulfilment
   of the adaptation of dreaming. Though there have been many attempts to
   explain dreaming as an Adaptation, few come close to the ideal
   neurocognitive scientists (for example, dreams are for consolidating
   distinguish their theory of the function of dreams from the function of
   According to Revonsuo, the actual content of dreams is helpful to the
   survival of an organism because dreaming enhances behaviours in waking
   Simulation Theory presents dreams as specializing in the recreation of
   1: Dream experience is more an organized state of mind than
   disorganized; Claim 2: Dreaming is tailored to and biased toward
   subsequent dreaming; Claim 4: Dreams provide realistic simulacra of
   Claim 6: Dreaming has been selected for (Revonsuo, 2000).
   dreams as a realistic and organized state of consciousness, as implied
   of dreams by asking why dreams would show the level of organization
   might imply or be committed to. Dreaming is allegedly similar to waking
   the dream (Valli & Revonsuo, 2009: p.18). These features of dreams are
   will occur during waking life and aid survival. Hence the dream self
   should be able to react in the dream situation with reasonable courses
   where a significant proportion of dreams involve situations in which
   the dreamer comes under attack. We do indeed generally have more
   negative emotions during an REM related dream. This claim is well
   supported by experiential examples of dreaming, where anxiety is the
   most frequent emotion in dreaming, joy/ elation was second and anger
   third (Hobson, 1994: p.157), making two thirds of dream emotion
   negative. That dreams process negative emotions likely occurs because
   the Threat Simulation Theory. We experience more threats in dreams (and
   Though Revonsuo claims that dreams specialize in the full panoply of
   that many dreams simply do not seem realistic representations of
   response. One study found, for example, that many recurrent dreams are
   for he believes that dreams may no longer be adaptive due to the
   dream consciousness was when humans were hunter-gatherers in the
   years; so dream content may now no longer seem to have the same
   Dreams are then comparable to the human appendix – useful and adaptive
   Dreams may have also become more lax in representing threatening
   waking life will not activate the threat simulation system of dreaming
   as it did in earlier times. Revonsuo uses evidence of ordinary dream
   such as the dreams of individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder
   dramatically affects what they dream about. Thus the relationship
   between dreaming and experiencing threats in waking life is
   bi-directional: Dreams try to anticipate the possible threats of waking
   in waking life will alter the course of later dreaming to re-simulate
   faces Jung’s theory. Revonsuo believes that dreaming during sleep
   all of our dreams are threatening. This fact surely helps the Threat
   hardware, underlying the ability to dream are transferred genetically
   insufficient number of threatening dreams were not able to survive to
   the trait to be passed on. So dreams ought to also specialize in
   behaviours If dreaming can, and does, make any difference to behaviour
   mate selection behaviours not make up a big factor in dreams? In
   humans, no more than 6% of adult dreams contain direct sexual themes
   that males tend to dream more of male characters than female
   that dreams are for threat perception and rehearsal, but not for
5. Dreaming in Contemporary Philosophy of Mind and Consciousness
a. Should Dreaming Be a Scientific Model?
i. Dreaming as a Model of Consciousness
   Revonsuo (2006) argues that dreaming should also have a place alongside
   a worthy model to be studied. Revonsuo argues that the dreaming brain
   (Revonsuo, 2006: p.73). The claim is that dreaming is an unusually rare
   the waking state, and this is why Metzinger claims that dreams are more
   argued that dreams are not even plausibly conscious states, Revonsuo
   and Metzinger argue that dreams may reveal the very essence of
   consciousness because of the conditions under which dream consciousness
   dreaming, (Metzinger, 2003: p.257) for example in dreams where the
   wedding bells. This means that most other dreams are “epistemically
   speak, left to its own devices. Dreaming is especially interesting and
   dream that it is only a dream. The estimated frequency of lucid dreams
   varies in different studies. Approximately 1 to 10% of dream reports
   lucid dream at least once in their lifetime (Farthing, 1992; Snyder &
   Gackenbach, 1988). Thus, as many as 90 to 99% of dreams are completely
   non-lucid, so that the dream world is taken for real by the dreamer”
   awareness qua a model system, as arguing that dreaming is another
   exemplary token of consciousness. Dreaming, unlike visual awareness, is
   (Revonsuo, 2006: p.75). Dreams also reveal the especially subjective
   Another reason that might motivate modelling dreaming is that it might
   localization in consciousness research. For example, during dreaming
   process missing during dreaming. Any parts of the brain not used in
   dreaming can be ruled out as not being necessary to phenomenal
   During dreams there is an output blockade (Revonsuo, 2006: p.87;
   Metzinger, 2003: p.257), making dreaming an especially pure and
   isolated system. Malcolm had argued that dreaming was worthy of no
   Dennett was sceptical that dreams would turn out to even involve
   consciousness. The radical proposal now is that dreaming ought to be
   dreams can recapitulate any experience from waking life and for this
   of consciousness is instantiated in both examples of dreaming and
ii. Dreaming as a Contrast Case for Waking Consciousness
   myriad of problems with taking dreaming as a scientific model in
   role dreaming can play in consciousness studies. They reject dreaming
   to wakefulness. The first major problem with using dreaming as a model
   dreaming. Hence there is no accepted definition of dreaming (Windt,
   2010: p.296). Taking dreaming as a model system of course requires and
   depends upon exactly what dreaming is characterized as. Revonsuo simply
   assumes his conception of dreaming is correct. He believes that
   dreaming can be a model of waking consciousness because dreams can be
   experiences. Windt & Noreika believe that dreams tend to be different
   There are further problems with modelling dreams. Collecting dream
   reports in the laboratory might amount to about five reported dreams a
   directly work with dreams themselves, but rather descriptions of
   dreams. There is also the added possibility of narrative fabrication
   (the difference between dream experience and dream report). During the
   dream itself, it is known that we do not have clarity of awareness as
   in waking life and we do have a poor memory during the dream
   experience. Though lucid dreaming is an exception to this rule, it
   differs from ordinary dreaming and lucid dreaming has not been proposed
   phenomenon properly but this in itself can influence the dream content
   It might be very difficult to investigate dreams but this comes with
   only that dreaming ought to be alongside it. The fact remains, however,
   that despite suggestions from Revonsuo and others, dreaming being used
   contrast analysis of dreaming with other wake states should at least be
   of using dreams in a contrast analysis with waking life? Though waking
   the world, dreaming is the second global state of consciousness. As
   displayed in reports, dreams involve features which are markedly
   key hallmarks of dreaming but not waking consciousness. The two states
   of waking and dreaming are mediated by radically different
   predominantly in control and for dreaming the cholinergic system takes
   contrast analysis does not ignore dreaming, but proposes a more modest
   approach. With research divided between waking consciousness, dreaming
   directions. It is important to compare dreaming as an important example
   contrastive analysis there is the prospect of comparing dream
   tenth of our conscious lives dreaming, and yet it is one of the most
   integrate dreams into consciousness studies. Windt and Noreika add the
   further proposal that dreams can be more specifically contrasted with
   dreams have been hitherto investigated and so has already proven to be
   option, however. Perhaps modelling dreams really would be ideal simply
   empirical dream research is a commonly accepted definition of dreaming”
   of what does and does not count as a dream (Mavromatis, 1987: p.3;
b. Is Dreaming an Instance of Images or Percepts?
   Some believe that dreaming involves mental imagery of both
   that dreams should only be thought of in terms of images (the
   inflate our ontology and invoke a third category that dreams are sui
   we should not believe dreams are a unique mental state. It would be
   strange, McGinn claims, if “the faculties recruited in dreaming were
   believes that dreaming is an instance of a psychological state we are
   dreams involve beliefs or imaginings (Ichikawa, 2009). This debate
   of dreaming is percept or imagining because all four possible
   combinations can be held: A theorist might claim that dreams are
   dreams involve hallucinations which we do not generate belief, but we
   are rather always entertaining our dream hallucinations as imagined
   possibilities. Alternatively, dreams might involve the psychological
   as though they were real; finally, dreams might involve imaginings
   merely imagining that what is perceived is the case. So if dreams are
   psychologically defined in terms of percepts, we can expect that dreams
   way the world is and so no longer believe what he perceives. If dreams
   McGinn claims that dreaming involves the imagination and quasi-belief.
   When we dream we are immersed in the fictional plot, as we are in
i. Dreaming as Hallucination
   dreams are hallucinations that occur during sleep. It is the typically
   unquestioned psychological orthodoxy that dreams are perceptual/
   hallucinatory experiences. Evidence can be cited for dreams as percepts
   dreams). (Valli & Revonsuo, 2009: p.19)
   our dream selves are also highly active during dreams. As the content
   of a dream reveals, we are always on the move. Apart from the bodily
   world. It is known that individuals will carry out their dream actions
   Behavior Disorder. This suggests that dreaming involves the ordinary
   The claim that dreams are hallucinations can find support in the
   further claim that dreaming replicates waking consciousness. Many
   nature of dreams, and this has been couched in terms of a virtual
   actually still asleep in dreaming. False awakenings can arguably be
   used in support of the view that dreaming is hallucinatory because such
   dreams detail a realistic depiction of one’s surroundings. Dreams fit
   Empirical evidence suggests that pain can be experienced in dreams,
   not replicate. So dreams must be hallucinatory, according to this line
   of reasoning. It is not clear though whether this rules out dreams as
   is, after all, a rarity in dreaming.
   metaphysical confusion and thought that their dreams involved genuine
   a memory of an experience as a dream or a waking event. We usually
   cannot always easily distinguish between dream experience and waking
   Finally, we seem to have real emotions during dreams which are the
   dreams, we dream that we are carrying actions out in an environment,
   but our accompanying emotions are not dreamed and play out alongside
   the rest of the dream content. The intensity of the emotions, actually
   of the dream not being merely imagined, but the natural response of
ii. Dreaming as Imagination
   A number of philosophers believe that dreaming is just the imagination
   that dreams are imaginings. Firstly, he introduces The Observational
   or see what they are discussing. During dreams of course, the body is
   the radio off or cover my ears. Dreaming is the natural instance of
   dreamer is hearing with their mind’s ear and seeing with their mind’s
   content. It ought to be possible, McGinn argues, that if dreams are
   surfing in a dream, I should be able to imagine the Eiffel tower at the
   same time. In dreams we cannot do this, there is just the dream, McGinn
   Recognition in dreams. In dreams we seem to already know who all of the
   (without using any of our senses). This might suggest that in dreams we
   recognize who dream characters are, such as relatives, even when they
   really are in control of other dream characters and that we accurately
   mechanism of misidentification is present in dreams as in certain
   dream characters, we try to identify them and make mistakes. This would
   thought that their own dreams, and dreams more generally, occurred in
   period that dreams occur in colour. This period coincided with the
   most reasonable conclusion to draw is that dreams are more like
   dreaming involves only images and is indeterminate to colour because
   the question whether we dream in colour or black and white – something
   about colour sensation in dreams”  (Ichikawa, 2009: p.109). McGinn also
   believes that dreams can be indeterminate to colour, and they can be
       “Discrimination of Dreaming and Nondreaming Sleep,” Archives of
     * Antrobus, J. (2000) “How Does the Dreaming Brain Explain the
       Dreaming Mind?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23 (6): pp. 904 –
            dreams, though it appears as though we sin.
     * Ayer, A. (1960) “Professor Malcolm on Dreams,” The Journal of
       Style on Dream Content,” Perceptual and Motor Skills 32:63–69.
       and Dream Reports,” Archives of General Psychiatry 19: pp. 300 –
     * Ballantyne, N. & Evans, E. (2010) “Sosa’s Dream,” Philos Stud
     * Barrett, D. (1992) “Just How Lucid are Lucid Dreams?” Dreaming 2:
     * Berger, R. J. (1967) “When is a Dream is a Dream is a Dream?”
     * Blackmore, S (1991) “Lucid Dreaming: Awake in your Sleep?”
          + Chapter 7, “Altered States of Consciousness,” looks at dreams
            and sleep and considers a “retro-selection theory of dreams”
            in reference to Dennett’s model of unconsciously dreaming.
     * Chappell, V. (1963) “The Concept of Dreaming,” Philosophical
     * Child, W. (2007) “Dreaming, Calculating, Thinking: Wittgenstein and
     * Child, W. (2009) “Wittgenstein, Dreaming and Anti-Realism: A Reply
     * Cicogna, P. & Bosinelli, M. (2001) “Consciousness during Dreams,”
     * Cohen, D., “Sweet Dreams,” New Scientist, Issue 2390, p. 50.
          + Dawkins briefly considers the phenomenon of purported dream
     * Dennett, D. (1976) “Are Dreams Experiences?” The Philosophical
            claim that dreams might not be experiences that occur during
     * Domhoff, G. & Kamiya, J. (1964) “Problems in Dream Content Study
       Dream Reports,” Archives of General Psychiatry 11: pp. 519 – 24.
     * Doricchi, F. et al (2007) “The “Ways” We Look at Dreams: Evidence
       dream bizarreness)” Exp Brain Res (2007) 178: pp. 450 – 461.
     * Driver, J. (2007) “Dream Immorality,” Philosophy, Vol. 82, No. 319
     * Empson, J. (1989) Sleep and Dreaming Hempstead: Harvester
     * Flanagan, O. (1995) “Deconstructing Dreams: The Spandrels of
     * Flanagan, O. (2000) Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams and the Evolution
            dreaming is also devoted to arguing that dreams are
     * Flowers, L. & Delaney, G. (2003) “Dream Therapy,” in Encyclopedia
     * Foulkes, D. (1999) Children’s Dreaming and the Development of
     * Freud, S. (1900) The Interpretation of Dreams in Great Books of the
     * Gerrans, P. (2012) “Dream Experience and a Revisionist Account of
            alleges that dreams contain similar delusional features.
     * Ghosh, P. (2010) “Dream Recording Device ‘Possible’ Researcher
     * Green, C. (1968) Lucid Dreams Oxford: Institute of Psychophysical
     * Green, C. & McCreery, C. (1994) Lucid Dreaming: The Paradox of
     * Greenberg, M. & Farah, M. (1986) “The Laterality of Dreaming,”
     * Gunderson K (2000) “The Dramaturgy of Dreams in Pleistocene Minds
     * Hacking, I. (1975) “Norman Malcolm’s Dreams,” in Why Does Language
     * Hacking, I. (2001) “Dreams in Place,” The Journal of Aesthetics and
     * Hill, J. (2004b) “Descartes’ Dreaming Argument and Why We Might Be
     * Hobson, J. (1988) Dreaming Brain Basic Books.
            of sleep and dreaming.
     * Hobson, J. (2001) Dream Drugstore: Chemically Altered States of
     * Hobson, J. (2005) Dreaming: A Very Short Introduction Oxford: OUP.
       Dreaming Wakes Up,” International Journal of Dream Research, Volume
     * Hobson, J. (2012) Dream Life: An Experimental Memoir Cambridge, MA:
     * Hodges, M. & Carter, W. (1969) “Nelson on Dreaming a Pain,”
     * Hopkins, J. (1991) “The Interpretation of Dreams,” In Neu, J.
     * Horton, C. et al (2009) “The Self and Dreams During a Period of
     * Hunter, J. (1971) “Some Questions about Dreaming,” Mind, 80
       Dreaming” The Philosophical Quarterly, Vol. 58, No. 232.
     * Ichikawa, J. (2009) “Dreaming and Imagination” Mind & Language,
            content of the book does not include the subject of dreaming).
            dreaming).
     * Johnson, R. (2009) Inner Work: Using Dreams and Active Imagination
            working specifically with the imagination and dreaming.
     * Jung, C. (1985) Dreams Ark: London.
          + A collection of Jung’s papers on dreams.
     * Kahan, T. & LaBerge, S. (2011) “Dreaming and Waking: Similarities
            eventually the method discussed might be applied to dreaming
            and scientists will thereby be able to “record” dreams.
       Malaise in Dreams,” International Journal of Dream Research, Volume
     * Kramer, M. (1962) “Malcolm on Dreaming,” Mind, New Series, Vol. 71,
       Dreaming New York: Ballantine Books.
     * LaBerge, S. (1990) “Lucid Dreaming: Psychophysiological Studies of
     * LaBerge, S. (2000) “Lucid Dreaming: Evidence that REM Sleep Can
       Studying the Psychophysiology of Dreaming,” The Lucidity Institute
     * LaBerge, S. & DeGracia, D.J. (2000). “Varieties of Lucid Dreaming
     * Lakoff, G. (1993) “How Metaphor Structures Dreams: The Theory of
       Conceptual Metaphor Applied to Dream Analysis,” Dreaming, 3 (2):
     * Lansky, M. (eds) (1992) Essential Papers on Dreams New York: New
       Characterizes Dream State in Humans,” Proceedings of the National
     * Love, D. (2013) Are You Dreaming? Exploring Lucid Dreams: A
     * Malcolm, N. (1956) “Dreaming and Skepticism,” The Philosophical
          + Malcolm’s first articulation of the argument that “dreaming”,
     * Malcolm, N. (1959) Dreaming London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 2^nd
     * Malcolm, N. (1961) “Professor Ayer on Dreaming,” The Journal of
     * Mann, W. (1983) “Dreams of Immorality,” Philosophy, Vol. 58, No.
          + Contains a chapter on dreams and meaning from the perspective
     * Matthews, G. (1981) “On Being Immoral in a Dream,” Philosophy, Vol.
     * McFee, G. (1994) “The Surface Grammar of Dreaming,” Proceedings of
     * McGinn, C. (2004) Mindsight: Image, Dream, Meaning USA: Harvard
          + The argument that dreaming is a type of imagining.
          + McGinn argues that dreaming preconditions humans to be
            dreaming makes use of the imagination via fictional immersion
          + Contains substantial sections on dreaming.
     * Möller, H. (1999) “Zhuangzi’s ‘Dream of the Butterfly’: A Daoist
     * Nagel (1959) “Dreaming,” Analysis, Vol. 19, No. 5 (Apr., 1959), pp.
     * Nielsen, T. (2012) “Variations in Dream Recall Frequency and Dream
     * Nir, Y. & Tononi, G. (2009) “Dreaming and the Brain: from
     * O’Shaughnessy, B. (2002) “Dreaming,” Inquiry, 45, pp. 399 – 432.
       Own Body Representation in Dreams,” Consciousness and Cognition, 20
     * Pears, D. (1961) “Professor Norman Malcolm: Dreaming,” Mind, New
     * Pesant, N. & Zadra, A. (2004) “Working with Dreams in Therapy: What
     * Putnam, H. (1962) “Dreaming and ‘Depth Grammar’,” in Butler (Eds.)
     * Revonsuo, A. (1995) “Consciousness, Dreams, and Virtual Realities,”
     * Revonsuo, A. (2000) “The Reinterpretation of Dreams: An
       Evolutionary Hypothesis of the Function of Dreaming,” Behavioral
          + An exposition and defence of the theory that dreaming is an
            creatures who do not dream, contra Flanagan.
          + In this paper, Rosenthal asks in passing whether dreams are
       Problems in Experimental Dream Research: An Introduction,” Journal
     * Schroeder, S. (1997) “The Concept of Dreaming: On Three Theses by
     * Schwitzgebel, E. (2002) “Why Did We Think We Dreamed in Black and
            dream experience itself and episodically remembering those
            experiences. Schwitzgebel couches his account of dreams as a
     * Schwitzgebel, E. (2003) “Do People Still Report Dreaming in Black
     * Schwitzgebel, E. Huang, C. & Zhou, Y. (2006) “Do We Dream In Color?
       Cultural Variations and Skepticism,” Dreaming, Vol. 16, No. 1: pp.
     * Seligman, E & Yellen, A (1987) “What is a Dream?” Behar. Res. Thu.
     * Shaffer, J. (1984) “Dreaming,” American Philosophical Quarterly,
     * Sharma, K. (2001) “Dreamless Sleep and Some Related Philosophical
     * Shredl, M. & Erlacher, D. (2004) “Lucid Dreaming Frequency and
       Associated with Lucid Dreaming” in Gackenbach, J. & LaBerge, S.
     * Solms, M. (1997) The Neuropsychology of Dreams Mahwah: Lawrence
            idea of abnormalities in dreaming. Some individuals with brain
            of their dreams.
            model of dreams, with the consequent attack on Descartes’
            dream argument.
     * Squires, R. (1995) “Dream Time,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian
     * Stewart, C. (2002) “Erotic Dreams and Nightmares from Antiquity to
     * Stickgold, R., Rittenhouse, C. & Hobson, J. A. (1994) “Dream
     * Sutton, J. (2009) “Dreaming” In Calvo, P., & Symons, J. (Eds.),
     * Symons, D. (1993) “The Stuff That Dreams Aren’t Made Of: Why
       Wake-State and Dream- State Sensory Experiences Differ,” Cognition,
     * Valli, K. (2011) “Dreaming in the Multilevel Framework,”
     * Whitmont, E. & Perera, S. (1989) Dreams, A Portal to the Source
     * Windt, J. M. & Metzinger, T. (2007) “The Philosophy of Dreaming and
       the Dream State?” In Barrett, D. & McNamara, P. (Eds.), The New
       Science of Dreaming, Vol 3: Cultural and Theoretical Perspectives,
       Model of Dreaming,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9,
     * Windt, J. M., & Noreika, V. (2011). “How to Integrate Dreaming into
       Dream: Varieties of Rational Thought Processes in Dream Reports,”
     * Yost, R. (1959) “Professor Malcolm on Dreaming and Skepticism-I,”
     * Zadra, A. (1998) “The Nature and Prevalence of Pain in Dreams,”
     * Zadra, A. and others (2006) “Evolutionary Function of Dreams: A
       Test of the Threat Simulation Theory in Recurrent Dreams,”
