               o DreamCloud Mattress
                    # DreamCloud Mattress
   / Dreams
How to Lucid Dream: Expert Tips and Tricks
     * What Is Lucid Dreaming?
     * How to Have a Lucid Dream
     * Is Lucid Dreaming Bad For You?
     * Lucid dreams occur when the sleeper is aware that they are in a
       dream and can exercise some control over their environment.
     * Various approaches can stimulate lucid dreaming and help train a
       person to lucid dream.
     * Frequent lucid dreams might decrease sleep quality or affect one’s
   About 55% of people have realized they were dreaming in the middle of a
   dream Trusted Source National Library of Medicine, Biotech Information
   Source . The experience of recognizing that you’re dreaming in the
   moment is called lucid dreaming. When people lucid dream, they can
   People who spontaneously lucid dream are often interested in finding
   ways to lucid dream again. Those who haven’t had a lucid dream may be
   multiple ways to potentially induce lucid dreaming, though the practice
What Is Lucid Dreaming?
   Lucid dreaming is a phenomenon in which a sleeper becomes aware that
   they are dreaming while they are still asleep. In about one-third of
   lucid dreams, the sleeper can influence or control what happens during
   the dream Trusted Source National Library of Medicine, Biotech
   Lucid dreams are distinct from vivid dreams, which are dreams that a
   View Source . While lucid dreams may be vivid, not all vivid dreams
   involve in-the-moment awareness that one is dreaming.
   “Vivid and lucid dreaming are distinct phenomena. While research is
   ongoing, the potential of lucid dreaming as a mental health
   Research indicates that lucid dreaming generally takes place during
   rapid eye movement (REM) sleep—the sleep stage in which most dreaming
   course of a night, which means that lucid dreams are more likely to
   Most people who have lucid dreams describe them as pleasant or even
   blissful experiences. Sleep experts and lucid dreamers have also
   indicated that lucid dreaming can help treat nightmares, reduce anxiety
   Graphic showing approximately 55% of adults have had a lucid dream and
How to Have a Lucid Dream
   induce lucid dreaming.
   “Lucid dreaming techniques hold promise, yet they may also lead to
Mnemonic Induction of Lucid Dreams (MILD)
   Mnemonic induction of lucid dreams, also known as the MILD technique,
   dream Trusted Source National Library of Medicine, Biotech Information
   when you’re dreaming and carrying that intention into the dream state.
       dreaming about or the details of a previous dream you’d like to
    2. Identify signs from the dream that will help you recognize you are
       dreaming if you fall back asleep and successfully reenter the
       dream.
       dreaming, I will remember that I’m dreaming.”
    4. Continue recalling dream content and repeating that phrase until
   others, it leads to a lucid dream in fewer than one in five cases.
   waking, the more likely you will be to have a lucid dream when using
Senses Initiated Lucid Dreams (SSILD)
   The Senses Initiated Lucid Dream (SSILD) technique appears to have
   make you more likely to notice the transition into the dream world or
   might prime your mind and body for a lucid dream.
   techniques intended to induce lucid dreaming Trusted Source National
   for a lucid dream Trusted Source National Library of Medicine, Biotech
       dreaming but will also have the capacity to fall back asleep. Aim
       chances of having a lucid dream, use this time to practice other
       dream journaling.
       research indicates you’re more likely to have a lucid dream if you
   lucid dreams or increase their frequency. This approach is intended to
   dreaming, thereby improving the likelihood that they will become aware
   of a dream state. However, there is little evidence to support the
   you’re awake, as well as while you are dreaming, if possible:
     * Ask yourself “Am I dreaming?”
     * Assess your surroundings for signs that you might be dreaming.
       You will only be able to do so if you’re dreaming.
       hand. If you can, you are dreaming.
Dream Journal
   Some people who have lucid dreams swear by the technique of keeping a
   dream journal, which involves writing down your dreams in as much
   detail as possible as soon as you wake up. Some lucid dreamers say that
   keeping a dream journal trains them to recall their dreams, helps them
   notice “dream signs,” and facilitates reality checks.
   While there is little scientific evidence that dream journals help
   induce lucid dreams, dream journals do appear to improve dream recall,
   also found that some people have lucid dreams after using dream
   A number of devices are marketed as being able to induce lucid dreams
   or blinking lights that are intended to serve as cues to dreamers,
   helping them realize they are dreaming.
   brain, which studies have linked to lucid dreaming Trusted Source
   cues, and tACS may increase the likelihood of having a lucid dream .
   galantamine can effectively induce lucid dreams. In its prescription
   lucid dreams . Research also indicates that a supplement called
   dreams on 42% of the nights during the study period, which is the best
   rate of lucid dream induction on record. Based on these findings, some
   a lucid dream:
Is Lucid Dreaming Bad For You?
   While many people view lucid dreams as pleasant and desirable, they can
     * Sleep loss: Many methods of inducing lucid dreams require a person
       poor sleep quality after failed attempts to induce lucid dreams.
       during lucid dreaming than it does during non-lucid REM sleep, some
       experts have expressed concern that lucid dreaming might disrupt
     * Sleep paralysis: Some people who induce lucid dreams experience
     * Dysphoric dreams: Sometimes, failed attempts to induce a lucid
       dream can lead to nightmares. Moreover, while lucid dreams are
       in which they are aware they are dreaming but unable to escape
       terrifying or horrific dream content.
       lucid dreams that lead to confusion about whether they are awake or
       dreams can lead to mental states in which they have trouble
   Before attempting to induce a lucid dream, it’s important to consider
   “While the study of dreams continues to captivate researchers and the
       dreaming-between waking and dreaming: A review about two
       Dream Induction Study. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1746.
       data on lucid dream induction techniques. Journal of Sleep
       Induction of lucid dreams: A systematic review of evidence.
    7. Erlacher, D., & Stumbrys, T. (2020). Wake up, work on dreams, back
       to bed and lucid dream: A sleep laboratory study. Frontiers in
       techniques: Does earlier sleep interruption reduce lucid dream
       dreams-Are they reliable?. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13, 428.
       awareness in dreams through frontal low current stimulation of
       dreaming: A state of consciousness with features of both waking and
       non-lucid dreaming. Sleep, 32(9), 1191–1200.
       DreamLight cues for eliciting lucid dreaming. Dreaming, 5, 3.
       https://www.asdreams.org/journal/articles/laberge5-3.htm
       dreams: Benefits are tied to successful induction and dream
Learn More About Dreams
   Woman writing in dream journal
Dream Interpretation
Why Do I Keep Dreaming About My Ex?
Dreams About Teeth Falling Out? 9 Possible Meanings
What Do Sex Dreams Mean?
How Trauma Affects Dreams
   Vivid Dreams, Explained
Vivid Dreams, Explained
Do Dreams Impact Sleep Quality?
Do Blind People Dream?
What Are Precognitive (Premonition) Dreams?
   Woman waking up after bad dream, covering eyes
Why You Keep Having Recurring Dreams
Is Lucid Dreaming Dangerous?
How Long Do Dreams Last?
   A young woman writes in her dream journal
What Is a Dream Journal Used For?
   Woman sleeping wearing a dream mask
Lucid Dream Masks: Do They Work?
Dreams: Why They Happen & What They Mean
What Is a Fever Dream?
