       dreams
Scientists break through the wall of sleep to the untapped world of dreams
   dreaming people, creating a new method for studying the human mind that
   one of whom was asleep and dreaming.
   are lucidly dreaming during REM (rapid eye movement) sleep. Supported
   dialogue from within a dream.
The windows to the soul (and dreams)
   Research into the fundamental nature of dreams, and what the human mind
   can do while dreaming, has been limited by a seemingly unsolvable
   problem: you can't get much information about someone's dream while
   they're actually having the dream. "All we have are the stories people
   focused on the dreaming mind. Konkoly describes the possibilities:
   awake. With two-way communication [during dreams], we could conduct
   But, how can a dreaming research subject communicate if they can't even
   Although our mind is active and dreams often occur during REM sleep,
   "looking" at various imagined things in their dream. If you dream that
   consciously controlled, the dreamer's eyes could become a vehicle for
   planet? So-called lucid dreamers can do these things and more from the
   comfort of their own bed. Accomplished lucid dreamers have reported
   being able to regularly achieve awareness in their dreams and even
   "programming" themselves to have dreams about specific activities or
   "I had no experience with lucid dreaming," says Mazurek, an
   near a lucid dream."
   dreaming and thus become lucid. The participants also learned the
   distinct response signal they should produce from within their dream:
   dreaming subjects, such as flashing lights in Morse code which the
   their dream. In most of the labs, the research participants were
   trained to move their "dream eyes" to signal their answer.
   correct response. And what was Mazurek dreaming about during this
   "I dreamed I was sleeping in the lab when I heard her question," he
   says. Despite that rather mundane dreamscape, "It still blew me away
   EEG while communicating in a dream
   Konkoly from his dream. The red shows the distinctive repeating
   communication in a dream, two more participants later accomplished that
   communication in dreams and reported that three additional individuals
   were able to provide correct responses while dreaming. The collective
   could be expanded and applied. "There's evidence that lucid dreaming is
   surgery — in a dream.
   a dream and come up with a creative answer more easily?
   phone home from the world of dreams without visiting a sleep
   and dreams affect health and mental abilities.
   a dream may one day be as routine as sending a text message on your
