Dreams and Dreaming
   Dreams and dreaming have been discussed in diverse areas of philosophy
   overview of major themes in the philosophy of sleep and dreaming, with
     * 1. Dreams and epistemology
          + 1.1 Cartesian dream skepticism
          + 1.2 Earlier discussions of dream skepticism and why Descartes’
          + 1.3 Dreaming and other skeptical scenarios
          + 1.4 Descartes’ solution to the dream problem and real-world
            dreams
     * 2. The ontology of dreams
          + 2.1 Are dreams experiences?
          + 2.2 Dreams as instantaneous memory insertions
          + 2.3 Empirical evidence on the question of dream experience
          + 2.4 Dreams and hallucinations
          + 2.5 Dreams and illusions
          + 2.6 Dreams as imaginative experiences
          + 2.7 Dreaming and waking mind wandering
          + 2.8 The problem of dream belief
     * 3. Dreaming and theories of consciousness
          + 3.1 Dreaming as a model system and test case for consciousness
          + 3.2 Dreams, psychosis, and delusions
          + 3.3 Beyond dreams: Dreamless sleep experience and the concepts
     * 4. Dreaming and the self
     * 5. Immorality and moral responsibility in dreams
     * 6. The meaning of dreams and the functions of dreaming
          + 6.1 The meaning of dreams
          + 6.2 The functions of dreaming
1. Dreams and epistemology
1.1 Cartesian dream skepticism
   Dream skepticism has traditionally been the most famous and widely
   discussed philosophical problem raised by dreaming (see Williams 1978;
   Stroud 1984). In the Meditations, Descartes uses dreams to motivate
   deception. By contrast, dreams suggest that even in a seemingly
   dream.
   There are different ways of construing the dream argument. A strong
   reading is that Descartes is trapped in a lifelong dream and none of
   Dreaming Doubt; see Newman 2019). A weaker reading is that he is just
   sometimes dreaming but cannot rule out at any given moment that he is
   dreaming right now (the Now Dreaming Doubt; see Newman 2019). This is
   are unless he can rule out that he is dreaming. Doubt is thus cast on
   If we apply this to the case of dreaming, we get:
    2. If I were now dreaming, this would be a genuine ground for doubting
       that I am sitting dressed by the fire: in dreams, I have often had
   Importantly, both strong and weak versions of the dream argument cast
   sides is knowable even if he is now dreaming:
     although, in truth, I should be dreaming, the rule still holds that
   By Descartes’ lights, dreams do not undermine our ability to engage in
1.2 Earlier discussions of dream skepticism and why Descartes’ version is
   Dream arguments have been a staple of philosophical skepticism since
   Earlier versions tended to touch upon dreams just briefly and discuss
     dreams and diseases, including insanity, and everything else that is
   Dreams also appear in the canon of standard skeptical arguments used by
   the Pyrrhonists. Again, dreams and sleep are just one of several
   Augustine (Against the Academics; Confessions) thought the dream
   distinguish both dreams and illusions from actual perception (Matthew
   dreams.
   Descartes devoted much more space to the discussion of dreaming and
   that he has often been deceived by his dreams implies he also saw
   dreaming as a real-world (rather than merely hypothetical) threat.
   claims (Frankfurt 1970). For example, Descartes builds up towards dream
   then deceptively realistic dreams.
   Finally, much attention has been devoted to several dreams Descartes
   reportedly had as a young man. Some believe these dreams embodied
   (2001:252) suggests that for Descartes, dream skepticism was not just a
   some discussion about the dream reports’ authenticity (Freud 1940; Cole
1.3 Dreaming and other skeptical scenarios
   In the Meditations, after discussing the dream argument, Descartes
   deceive us even in our most basic beliefs. Contrary to dream deception,
   Still, it radicalizes the dream doubt in two respects. One, where the
   dream argument left the knowability of certain general truths intact,
   dream argument, at least on the weaker reading, involves just temporary
   Unlike dream deception, which is often cast as a regularly recurring
   psychological force by capitalizing on the analogy with dreams. Clark
   shifts that are the hallmark of dreams.
1.4 Descartes’ solution to the dream problem and real-world dreams
   the dream problem that is tied to a reassessment of what it is like to
   dream. Contrary to his remarks in the First Meditation, he notes that
   dreams are only rarely connected to waking memories and are often
   discontinuous, as when dream characters suddenly appear or disappear.
   For all practical purposes, he has now found a mark by which dreaming
   coherence test is not fail-safe, the threat of dream deception has been
   dreams are backed up by empirical work on dream bizarreness (see Hobson
   revised phenomenological description characterizes most dreams, one
   might occasionally merely dream of successfully performing the test
   (Hobbes 1641), and in some dreams, one might seem to have a clear and
   How considerations of empirical plausibility impact the dream argument
   scientific dream research to introduce an introspective criterion: when
   dreaming. However, this assumes critical reasoning to be uniformly
   absent in dreams. If attempts at critical reasoning do occur in dreams
   which even after awakening, people mistake what was in fact a dream for
   some people, dream deception might be a genuine cause of concern (Windt
2. The ontology of dreams
   etc. in dreams (cf. Dennett 1976). These are all phenomenal states:
   experience (cf. Nagel 1974). To ask about dream experience is to ask
   whether it is like something to dream while dreaming, and whether what
2.1 Are dreams experiences?
   Cartesian dream skepticism depends on a seemingly innocent background
   assumption: that dreams are conscious experiences. If this is false,
   then dreams are not deceptive experiences during sleep and we cannot be
   deceived, while dreaming, about anything at all. Whether dreams are
   experiences is a major question for the ontology of dreams and closely
   bound up with dream skepticism.
   The most famous argument denying that dreams are experiences was
   analysis of dreaming as a target phenomenon for philosophy of mind.
   For Malcolm, the denial of dream experience followed from the
     the concept of dreaming is derived, not from dreaming, but from
     descriptions of dreams, i.e., from the familiar phenomenon that we
     call “telling a dream”. (Malcolm 1959:55)
   Malcolm argued that retrospective dream reports are the sole criterion
   for determining whether a dream occurred and there is no independent
   way of verifying dream reports. While first-person, past-tense
   1961; Siegler 1967; Schröder 1997), he argued dream reports (such as
   “in my dream, I felt afraid”) are governed by different grammars and
   dream reports imply the occurrence of experiences (such as thoughts,
     If a man had certain thoughts and feelings in a dream it no more
     it follows from his having climbed a mountain in a dream that he
   and it is senseless to apply them to sleep and dreams (Malcolm 1959:
   Malcolm’s analysis of dreaming has been criticized as assuming an
   of dreams in sleep aside from dream reports. This includes behavioral
   the person was partially awake; as he also thought dreams occur in
   investigation of dreaming proper. He also claimed adopting a
   physiological criterion of dreaming (such as EEG measures of brain
   activity during sleep) would change the concept of dreaming, which he
   argued was tied exclusively to dream reporting. This claim was
   sleep and its association with dreaming (Dement & Kleitman 1957), which
   dreaming. Malcolm’s position was that the very project of a science of
   dreaming was misguided.
   physiological evidence can be used to verify dream reports (Ayer 1960)
   and the alleged principled difference between dream reports and other
   Putnam noted that Malcolm’s analysis of the concept of dreaming relies
     connection between dreams and waking impressions. […] this “depth
   of dreaming,
     does not imply that nothing goes on in our minds while we dream.
   Whether dream thoughts, feelings or beliefs should count as real
   experiences while asleep and dreaming.
2.2 Dreams as instantaneous memory insertions
   To ask about dream experience is also to ask whether there is something
   it is like to dream during sleep as opposed to there just being
   something it is like to remember dreaming after awakening. Dennett’s
   (1976, 1979) cassette theory says dreams are the product of
   cassette with pre-scripted dreams had been inserted into memory, ready
   for replay. Dennett claims the cassette theory and the view that dreams
   instance on the relationship between dreaming and REM sleep. The
   only an unconscious dream composition process rather than an additional
   theories based on dream recall; the question of dream experience should
   While Dennett shares Malcolm’s skepticism about dream experience, this
   science of dreaming. For Dennett, the unreliability of dream recall
   to Maury’s (1861) description of a long and complex dream about the
   fallen on his neck. Because the dream seemed to systematically build up
   Similarly, Gregory (1916) described dreams are psychical explosions
   The trustworthiness of dream reports continues to be contentious. Rosen
   (2013) argues that dream reports are often fabricated and fail to
   Windt (2013, 2015a) argues that dream reports can at least under
   certain conditions (such as in laboratory studies, when dreams are
2.3 Empirical evidence on the question of dream experience
   Unlike Malcolm, many believe that whether dreams are experiences is an
   A first reason for thinking that dreams are experiences during sleep is
   the relationship between dreaming and REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.
   seem to support the experiential status of dreams as well as explain
   dreaming are in fact much more frequent following REM (81.9%) than NREM
   objective marker of dreaming (Dement & Kleitman 1957; Hobson 1988:
   Attempts to identify dreaming with mental activity during REM sleep
   have not, however, been successful, and many now hold that dreams can
   has been renewed interest in NREM sleep for the study of dreaming
   dreaming is not straightforward.
   A second line of evidence comes from lucid dreams, or dreams in which
   one knows one is dreaming and often has some level of dream control
   lucid dreaming was coined by van Eeden (1913), but Aristotle (On
   Dreams) already noted that one can sometimes be aware while dreaming
   that one is dreaming.
   Scientific evidence that lucid dreaming is real and a genuine sleep
   1981) showing lucid dreamers can use specific, pre-arranged patterns of
   they are now lucid and engaging in dream experiments. These signals are
   dream-eye movements and real-eye movements (as predicted by the
   dreamer really was lucid and signalled lucidity (Dresler et al. 2012;
   Signal-verified lucid dreams have been used to study muscular activity
   accompanying body movements in dreams (Erlacher et al. 2003; Dresler et
   dreaming (Voss et al. 2009), and imaging studies (Dresler et al. 2011,
   different activities performed in lucid dreams; contrary to the
   cassette theory, lucid dreams have temporal extension and certain dream
   Voss et al. 2014). The combination of signal-verified lucid dreaming
   with volitional control over dream content, retrospective report, and
   A third line of evidence (Revonsuo 2006: 77) comes from dream-enactment
   or fighting off an attacker during REM sleep. Retrospective dream
   act out their dreams during sleep.
   about dream experience. They might worry that results from lucid
   dreaming and dream enactment do not generalize to ordinary, non-lucid
   dreams; they might also construe alternative explanations that do not
   dream experience. A key issue is that to support the experiential
   status of dreams, evidence from sleep polysomnography, signal verified
   lucid dreams, or sleep behavior requires convergence with retrospective
   dream reports. This means trusting dream reports is built into any
   attempt to empirically resolve the question of dream experience – which
   the convergence of dream reports and objective polysomnographic or
   behavioral observations is best explained by the assumption that dreams
   further incoming findings. This strategy places dream reports at the
   center of scientific dream research while avoiding the contentious
   of dreams, can be demonstrated conclusively by independent empirical
2.4 Dreams and hallucinations
   Even where philosophers agree dreams are experiences, they often
   disagree on how exactly to characterize dreaming relative to wake-state
   psychological terms. Often, questions about the ontology of dreaming
   The standard view is that dreams have the same phenomenal character as
   perceived. This means dreams count as hallucinations in the
   a particularly realistic dream, my visual experience was exactly as it
   dreams should be regarded as hallucinations. Some believe the term
   The view that dreams involve hallucinations is implicit in Descartes’
   assumption that even when dreaming,
   It also lies at the heart of Aristotle’s (On Dreams) assumption that
   dreams result from the movements of the sensory organs that continue
   The assumption of phenomenological equivalence between dream and waking
   Russell defended sense-data theory by noting that in dreams,
     dreaming. (Russell 1948: 149–150)
   Elsewhere, he argued dreams and waking life
     merely sensible that dreams can be condemned. (Russell 1914: 69)
   Hume was less clear on this matter, proposing that dreams occupy an
   creatures of the mind, Hume wanted to categorize dreams as ideas. On
   the vivacity of sensory impressions” (Hume 1739: 1.1.1.1). Dreams do
   Phenomenologists often focus not so much on the quality of dream
   imagery as on the overall character of experience, noting that dreams
   present in a world. This also sets dreams apart from waking fantasy and
   daydreams (Husserl 1904/1905; Uslar 1964; Conrad 1968; Globus 1987: 89.
   At its strongest, the hallucination view claims that dreaming and
   consciousness itself is dreamlike and waking perception a kind of
   dreams is paralleled by high activation of the corresponding brain
   cognitive deficits often thought to characterize dreams such as the
   of dreaming results from the fact that in REM sleep, the visual and
   sole difference being dreams’ dependence on internal signal generation.
   they took to support the perceptual equivalence between dreaming and
   Generally, versions of the hallucination view that suggest dreams
   visual search), we might not know enough about dream phenomenology to
   view. Dreams are heterogeneous, and some might be more perception-like
   which tend to be rare in dreams (Hobson 1988). Visual dream imagery
   Classifying dreams as either hallucinatory or imaginative is further
   between, say, visual dream imagery and visual perception does not
   necessarily set dreaming apart from waking imagination.
   This is also true for evidence on eye movements in dreams. LaBerge and
   smooth in lucid dreaming and perceiving, but not in imagining. Drawing
   from this evidence, Rosen (forthcoming) suggests many dreams mimic the
   movements and visual search. Others argue we should not analogize dream
   might instead be implicated in the generation of dream imagery (Windt
2.5 Dreams and illusions
   Another way to make sense of the claim that dreaming has the same
   phenomenal character as waking perception is to say some kinds of dream
   hallucination view on whether dreams have a contemporaneous external
   Ancients believed dreams have bodily sources. This idea underlies the
   practice of using dreams to diagnose illness, as practiced in the
   shrines at Epidaurus (Galen On Diagnosis in Dreams; van de Castle
   1994). Aristotle (On Dreams) thought some dreams are caused by
   dreams could be traced to different bodily sensations. For instance,
   “lying cold breedeth Dreams of Feare, and raiseth the thought and Image
   Appeals to the bodily sources of dreaming became especially popular in
   the 19^th and early 20^th centuries. Many believed specific dream
   There were also attempts to explain the phenomenology of dreaming by
   dreams of being unable to move (Bradley 1894) or of trying but failing
   of dreaming attempted to go beyond anecdotal observations to conduct
   stimulation during sleep on dream content (see Schredl 2010 for
   in dreams can inform claims on the ontology of dreaming: If dreams are
   frequency of dreams in nearby sleepers as well as the frequency of
   sound in their dreams, and it should decrease the range of quality and
   intensity of these dreams, making them overall more similar and
   stimuli in dreams, including light flashes, sounds, sprays of water
   Muscular activity also often leaves its mark on dreams. It occurs
   2016). The relation between outward and dream movements is complex: in
   some cases, outward movements might mirror dream movements, while in
   others, sensory feedback might prompt dream imagery (Windt 2018).
   varying degrees to dream and sleep onset imagery (Nielsen 2017; Windt
   a dream, as a siren, or when blood pressure cuff inflation on the leg
   leads to dreams of wearing strange shoes (Windt 2018; for these and
   blood pressure cuff stimulation on the leg prompts a dream of seeing
   Saying that dreams can be prompted by external stimuli and that in some
   somatic-stimulus theory, that dreams generally are caused by external
     ideas which arise in dreams come, at least to a great extent, from
   external or bodily stimuli on their own cannot fully explain dream
   dreams. Sensory incorporation in dreams is often hard to predict and
   explanation of dream content additionally has to take the cognitive and
   memory sources of dreaming into account (Windt 2018; Nielsen 2017; cf.
2.6 Dreams as imaginative experiences
   The most important rival to the hallucination view is that dreams are
   mean dream imagery involves imaginings rather than percepts (including
   hallucinations or illusions; McGinn 2004), that dream beliefs are
   2009). An important advantage is that by assimilating dreams to
   commonplace mental states such as waking fantasy and daydreaming,
   are diverse, and dreams have been proposed to resemble imaginings and
   One way is to deny dreams involve presence or the feeling of being in a
   theorists compare the sense in which we feel present in our dreams to
   daydream (Sartre 1940; McGinn 2004; but see Hering 1947; Globus 1987).
   dreams) interrupts cognitive absorption and terminates the ongoing
   dream (Sartre 1940), essentially denying lucid dreams are possible.
   Another issue is whether dreams are subject to the will (Ichikawa
   Because dreams just seem to happen to us without being under voluntary
   Ichikawa (2009) argues lucid control dreams show dreams are generally
   Dreams are widely described as more indeterminate than waking
   perception (James 1890: 47; Stone 1984). In scientific dream research,
   (Hobson 1988; Revonsuo & Salmivalli 1995). An example are dream
   just knowing (Kahn et al. 2000, 2002; Revonsuo & Tarkko 2002). Dreams
   (Thompson 2014); while it is tempting to construe the dream world as
   rich in detail, there is no more to dreams than meets the eye, and many
   think dream experience is exhausted by what is the focus of selective
   Indeterminacy is also related to the question of whether we dream in
   theories on dream color that coincides with the rise first of
   that dreams themselves changed from colored to black and white and back
   explanation. Maybe dreams were either black and white or colored all
   main point is that reports of colored dreaming are unreliable and our
   opinions about dreams can be mistaken (but see Windt 2013, 2015a). This
   The issue of dream color has led to a number of follow-up studies
   al. 2008; Hoss 2010). They suggest most people dream in color and a
   small percentage describe grayscale or even mixed dreams (Murzyn 2008)
   or dreams involving moderate color saturation (Rechtschaffen and
   The imagination view has consequences for Cartesian dream skepticism.
   If dream pain does not feel like real pain, there is a fail-safe way to
   determine whether one is now dreaming: one need only pinch oneself
     if our dreamer pleases to try, whether the glowing heat of a glass
   If dreaming feels different from waking, this raises the question why
   we tend to describe dreams in the same terms as waking perception.
     it is just because we all know that dreams are throughout unlike
   Some authors classify dreams as imaginings while acknowledging they
   feel like perceiving. For example, Hobbes describes dreams as “the
   appearance to us is Fancy, the same waking, that dreaming” (Hobbes
   cognitive theories. Foulkes (1978: 5) describes dreaming as a form of
   thinking with its own grammar and syntax, but allows that dream imagery
   model of dreaming (2001, 2003) emphasizes the dependence of dreaming on
   cessation of dreaming following brain lesions (cf. Solms 1997, 2000),
   evidence that dreaming develops gradually and in tandem with
   et al. 1994), and results from dream content analysis supporting the
   continuity of dreaming with waking concerns and memories (the so-called
2.7 Dreaming and waking mind wandering
   A number of researchers have begun to consider dreaming in the context
   on phenomenological and neurophysiological similarities, dreams have
   that the spontaneous formation of visions in dreams surpasses the
   The analogy between dreams and waking mind wandering has been discussed
   dreams and waking mind wandering as involving a cyclically recurring
   conscious thought processes. Dreams and waking mind wandering are not
   subpersonal processes such as breathing or heartbeat. Because dreaming
   This raises the question of how to make sense of lucid control dreams,
   dreams and instances of waking mind wandering can be both spontaneous
   the ontology of dreaming. In this debate, a common assumption is that
   dreams can be categorized as either hallucinatory or imaginative. Yet
   the application of these terms to dreams quickly runs into
   option is pluralism (Rosen 2018b), in which some aspects of dreaming
   Another is that dreams are sui generis, combining aspects associated
   particularly suitable for the characterization of dreaming precisely
   phenomenology of dreaming, allowing for variation in control,
   describing what is unique about dreaming while also acknowledging
2.8 The problem of dream belief
   The second strand of the imagination view argues that dream beliefs are
   combined with the claim that dream imagery is imaginative rather than
   Denying that dream beliefs have the status of real beliefs only makes
   of belief, dream beliefs fall short of real beliefs. He claims dream
   real beliefs. Moreover, we cannot ascribe dream beliefs to a person by
   observing them lying asleep in bed. Dream beliefs are often
   This analysis of dream beliefs has consequences for skepticism. If
   dream beliefs are propositional imaginings, then we do not falsely
   believe while dreaming that we are now awake, but only imagine that we
   deception. If dream beliefs fall short of real beliefs, this might even
   make the specter of dream deception more worrisome: in mistaking dream
     in fact believe or realize in the course of a dream that he was
     dreaming, and even if we said that, in such case, he only dreamt
     that he was dreaming, this still leaves it possible for someone who
   The debate about dream beliefs is paralleled by a debate about whether
   especially as dreams are sometimes proposed to be delusional (Hobson
3. Dreaming and theories of consciousness
3.1 Dreaming as a model system and test case for consciousness research
   Dreams are a global state of consciousness in which experience arises
   states (such as psychosis or neurological syndromes), dreams occur
   regard dreams as a test case for theories of consciousness or even an
   Existing proposals differ on the phenomenology of dreaming: referring
   to dream bizarreness, Churchland describes dream experience as robustly
   different from waking, whereas Revonsuo argues dreaming is similar to
     the dreaming brain brings out the phenomenal level of organization
     in a clear and distinct form. Dreaming is phenomenality pure and
   Revonsuo argues dreaming reveals the basic, state-independent structure
   of consciousness to be immersive: “dreaming depicts consciousness first
   simulational and dreamlike. This is taken to support internalism about
   phenomenological differences between dreaming and waking (such as
   greater instability of visual dream imagery) result from the lack of
   dynamic interaction with the environment in dreams. He proposes this
   shows that neural states are sufficient for dreaming but denies they
   assumptions about the phenomenology of dreaming and its disconnection
   argues both internalism and externalism mistakenly assume dreams to be
   believes both the phenomenology of dreaming and its correlation with
   dreaming does not clearly support either side in the debate on
   absence of a well worked out theory of dreaming and its sleep-stage and
   neural correlates, proposals for using dreaming as a model system or
   perception, imagination, and dreaming. In these accounts, different
     this is correct, are inevitably potential dreamers and imaginers
     too. Moreover, they are beings who, in dreaming and imagining, are
   features of dreaming. Bizarreness has been associated with the
   comparative lack of external stimulus processing, implying dream
   suggests a predictive processing account of dream imagery generation
   & Plumeau 2016). She argues that movement sensations in dreams, in
   Dreams have also been suggested as a test case for whether phenomenal
   but see Cohen & Dennett 2011). Sebastián (2014a) argues that dreams
   REM-sleep dreams, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) as the
3.2 Dreams, psychosis, and delusions
   Dreaming has been suggested as a model system not just of waking
   particular. The analogy between dreaming and madness has a long
   “dreaming is not a model of a psychosis. It is a psychosis. It’s just a
   healthy one” (Hobson 1999: 44). Gottesmann (2006) proposes dreaming as
   on the theoretical and methodological implications of dream research
   and a number of studies have investigated differences in dream reports
   Rather than likening dreaming to waking in general or specific wake
   specific dream phenomena to wake-state delusions. Gerrans (2012, 2013,
   2014) focuses on character misidentification in dreams and delusions of
   agency in dreams as compared to waking.
3.3 Beyond dreams: Dreamless sleep experience and the concepts of sleep,
   Philosophers have focused almost exclusively on dreaming, largely
   leaving to the side questions about dreamless sleep including whether
   interest in the possibility of dreamless sleep experience and
   been paralleled by growing interest in dreaming in NREM sleep.
   Conceptually, interest in dreamless sleep experience has been
   facilitated by the precise definition of dreaming offered by simulation
   views (Revonsuo et al. 2015). If dreams are immersive sleep experiences
   contrast, if dreaming is broadly identified with any conscious
   for dreamless sleep experience.
   Following Thompson's (2014, 2015) discussion of dreamless sleep in
   Windt 2015b) introduce a framework for different kinds of dreamless
   in sleep are white dreams, where people report having had experiences
   white dream reports might describe experiences that lack reportable
   content (Windt 2015b); others might describe forgotten dreams or dreams
   reports of witnessing dreamless sleep, as described in certain
   in Buddhist philosophy explain claims of deep and dreamless sleep by
   Empirically, interest in dreamless sleep experience is paralleled by
   Most researchers now accept that dreaming is not confined to REM sleep,
   proportions of dreaming, unconscious sleep, and white dreams (Noreika
   correlates of dreaming vs unconscious dreamless sleep, this makes
   involved in comparing presumably dreamful REM sleep with presumably
   dreamless NREM sleep. Findings suggest that activity in the same
   parietal hot zone underlies dreaming in both NREM and REM sleep
   Where sleep and dream research have traditionally tried to identify the
   sleep stage correlates of dreaming, newer research suggests local
   2019). While sleep and dream research are often considered as separate
   conception of dreaming and its empirical investigation.
   Historically, discoveries about dreaming have precipitated changing
   and dreaming, see Kroker 2007). Following Aristotle (On Sleeping and
   empirically implausible. At the same time dreaming, which had
   narrowed to REM sleep. Today, the framework for describing dreams and
   other sleep-related experiences is more precise, but dreaming has also
   this potential need not be actualized. By contrast, dreaming is an
   dreams, the epistemic and agentive profile of waking is at least partly
   waking than nonlucid dreams.
   imagination model of dreaming and dream skepticism (Soteriou 2017). As
   in the imagination model, dreaming would be passive and action,
   including cognitive agency, would be tied to waking. If dreaming
   active, one would be unable to tell that one were dreaming and
   The sceptical consequence would be that when dreaming, one would lose
   conceptions of sleep and dreaming. As dreaming went from a state whose
   defined contrastively as that which disappears in deep, dreamless sleep
   and reappears in waking and dreaming (Searle 2000; Tononi 2008). In
   light of dreamless sleep experience, such definitions are problematic
   (Thompson 2014, 2015; Windt 2015b; Windt et al. 2016). Dreamless sleep
   The investigation of dreamless sleep might thus shed light on the
4. Dreaming and the self
   We almost always have a self in dreams, though this self can sometimes
   self or even a different person entirely. Dreams therefore raise
   interesting questions about the identity between the dream and waking
   dreams and the idea that we dream throughout sleep, remembering only a
   small proportion of our dreams (Locke 1689: II.I.19).
   Valberg distinguishes between the subject of the dream (i.e., the dream
   self) and the sleeping person who is the dreamer of the dream and
   a dream involves crossing a chasm between discrete worlds with discrete
   (Valberg 2007: 69). According to Valberg, this is relevant to dream
   that it is I who emerge from a dream or that I was the victim of dream
   Vicarious dreams, or dreams in which the protagonist of the dream seems
   to be a different person from the dreamer, are particularly puzzling
   the dream self has an independent existence (Rosen & Sutton 2013:
   1047). Such dreams are superficially similar to cases in which we
   a different explanation: in the case of dreaming, the imagined person’s
   nonlucid dreams, only the perspective of the dream’s protagonist is
   The dream self is also at the center of simulation views of dreaming,
   which define dreaming via its immersive, here and now character as the
   the phenomenology of self-experience in dreams and how it is different
   focus on different aspects of self- and world experience in dreams,
   features of selfhood in dreams (Revonsuo 2005, 2006, Metzinger 2003,
   dreams and what this tells us about minimal phenomenal selfhood in
   about the definition of dreaming. They also integrate the philosophy of
   dreaming and scientific dream research.
   As so often in debates about dreaming, there is disagreement about
   self-experience including bodily experience in dreams as identical to
   dreams. He argues this is due to the cognitive and mnemonic deficit
   that characterizes nonlucid dreams (cf. Hobson et al. 2000). Windt
   dreams, both of which she describes as variable. She argues that in a
   majority of cases, dreams are weakly phenomenally embodied states in
   experience in dreams is largely indeterminate (for an attempt to test
   is because dreams are also weakly functionally embodied states, in
   analyzes instances of bodiless dreams, in which dreamers say they
5. Immorality and moral responsibility in dreams
   How the phenomenology of dreaming compares to waking and what to say
   about how the dream self relates to the waking self bears on questions
   about the moral status of dreams. For Augustine (Confessions) dreams
   from waking life. What particularly worried him about dreams of sexual
   seeming acquiescence or consent on the part of the dreamer. He
   involves a radical chasm, enabling the dreamer to awaken with a clear
   dream actions.
   What exactly Augustine thought the chasm between dreaming and waking
   Firstly, if the dream and waking self are not identical, then waking
   Augustine is not morally responsible for dream-Augustine’s actions.
   Secondly, actions performed in dreams might be morally irrelevant
   responsibility requires the ability to act otherwise, dreams provide no
   types of dreams.
   The issue of dream immorality may also present a choice point between
   dream immorality itself should count against purely internalist
   feature of dreams.
   Central to the question of dream immorality is the status of dreams as
   don’t have full control over our dreams, they are not completely
   required to attain control over our dreams and in some cases they can
   even be considered as actions. That lucid dream control is, to some
6. The meaning of dreams and the functions of dreaming
6.1 The meaning of dreams
   Philosophical discussions of dreaming tend to focus on (a) dream
   deception and (b) questions about the ontology of dreaming, its moral
   status, etc., that tend to intersect with dream skepticism. By
   contrast, the main source of interest in dreams outside of philosophy
   traditionally has been dream interpretation and whether dreams are a
   dreams and the use of prophetic and diagnostic dreams was not just a
   dreams were distinguished by their putative epistemic value.
   Artemidorus, for instance, used the term enhypnion to refer to dreams
   term oneiron for meaningful and symbolic dreams of divine origin.
   The practice of dream interpretation was famously attacked by Aristotle
   in On Prophecy in Sleep. He denied that dreams are of divine origin,
   are perceptible in the quiet of sleep. He also believed such dreams
   desert – an assessment that was not apt to encourage interest in dreams
   philosophers who believed dreams were often the source of superstitious
   In Freudian dream theory, dream interpretation once more assumed a
   was associated with claims about the psychic sources of dreaming. Freud
   In the neuroscience of dreaming, Hobson famously argued that dreams are
   illustrates the lack of design underlying the production of dream
   Even if we grant that dreams are not messages from a hidden entity in
   need of decoding, this does not imply that dream interpretation cannot
   methods, dream interpretation can lead to personally significant
   Finally, throughout history, views on the epistemic status of dreams
   and the type of knowledge to be gained from dream interpretation (e.g.,
   origin and sources of dreaming, which gradually moved from divine
6.2 The functions of dreaming
   Different theories on the functions of dreaming have been proposed and
   functions of sleep stages and the functions of dreaming.
   functions are obviously linked to dreaming. An exception is
   studies have investigated the relationship between dream content and
   2005). Dreams rarely involve episodic replay of waking memories (Fosse
   novel, complex, and dreamlike images at sleep onset; he proposes these
   microdreams shed light on the formation and sources of more complex
   dreams. There is also some evidence that dream imagery might be
   Prominent theories on the function of dreaming focus on bad dreams and
   nightmares. It has long been thought that dreaming contributes to
   dreams of nightmare sufferers or in dreams following traumatic
   high prevalence of negative emotions and threatening dream content,
   dreaming lies in the simulation of ancestral threats and the rehearsal
   of threatening events and avoidance skills in dreams has an adaptive
   in which social imagery in dreams supports social cognition, bonds, and
   aspects of dream phenomenology. According to the vigilance hypothesis,
   Dream sounds, but also smells or pains might distract attention from
   vigilance hypothesis predicts that they only rarely occur in dreams
   thus can occur in dreams without endangering the sleeping subject.
   Focusing on the stuff dreams are not made of might then be at least as
   important for understanding the function of dreaming as developing a
   Finally, even if dreaming in general and specific types of dream
   specific cognitive functions, it would still be possible that dreams
   2000). It is also possible that the function of dreams is not knowable
   A particular problem for any theory on the function of dreaming is to
   explain why a majority of dreams are forgotten and how dreams can
   enhanced dream recall is counterproductive. Another problem is that
   dreaming can be lost selectively and independently of other cognitive
   dreaming can be avoided if we do not assume that dreaming has a
   states. This depends on the broader taxonomy of dreaming in relation to
   wakeful states. For example, if dreaming is continuous with waking mind
   should we expect dreams to have a single function; the functions of
   dreaming might be as varied and complex as those of consciousness, and
   Questions about dreaming in different areas of philosophy such as
   dream research can meaningfully inform the philosophical discussion and
   has often done so in the past. The discussion of dreaming has also
   philosophy of dreaming and of sleep is central to important
       Eye Movements, Visual Imagery, and Dreaming”, in Sleep and
     * Aristotle, On Dreams, in Aristotle: On the Soul. Parva Naturalia.
     * Artemidorus, The Interpretation of Dreams, R.J. White (ed.), New
     * Ayer, A.J., 1960, “Professor Malcolm on Dreams”, Journal of
       neuroscience of lucid dreaming”, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
     * Baldridge, B.J., 1966, “Physical Concomittants of Dreaming and the
       Effect of Stimulation on Dreams”, Ohio State Medical Journal, 62:
     * Barbera, J., 2008, “Sleep and Dreaming in Greek and Roman
       Dreaming, Volume 1: Biological Aspects, Westport: Praeger
     * ––– (eds.), 2007b, The New Science of Dreaming, Volume 2: Content,
     * ––– (eds.), 2007c, The New Science of Dreaming, Volume 3: Cultural
     * Berger, R.J., 1963, “Experimental Modification of Dream Content by
     * Bergson, H., 1914, Dreams, E.E. Slosson (ed. and trans.), New York:
     * Blumberg, M., 2010, “Beyond dreams: do sleep-related movements
     * Blumberg, M., and A. Plumeau, 2016, “A new view of ‘dream
     * Bradley, F.H., 1894, “The Failure of Movement in Dream”, Mind,
       Dreams, New York: International Universities Press.
     * Browne, A., 1977, “Descartes’s Dreams”, Journal of the Warburg and
     * Bucci, A., and M. Grasso, 2017, “Sleep and dreaming in the
       Sleep and Dreaming in our Emotional Lives, Oxford: Oxford
     * Chihara, C.S., 1965, “What Dreams Are Made On”, Theoria, 31:
     * Clark, A., 2005, “The Twisted Matrix: Dream, Simulation, or
     * –––, 2013a, “Dreaming the Whole Cat: Generative Models, Predictive
     * Cole, J.R., 1992, The Olympian Dreams and Youthful Rebellion of
     * Crick, F. and G. Mitchinson, 1983, “The Function of Dream Sleep”,
     * Crowther, T., 2018, “Experience, dreaming, and the phenomenology of
     * D’Agostino, A., A. Castelnovo, and S. Scarone, 2013, “Dreaming and
       2007, “Neuroimaging of Sleep and Dreaming”, in Barrett and McNamara
       during Sleep to Dream Activity: An Objective Method for the Study
       of Dreaming”, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53: 89–97.
       Body Motility, and External Stimuli to Dream Content”, Journal of
     * Dennett, D.C., 1976, “Are dreams experiences?”, The Philosophical
       “Cognitive and Emotional Processes during Dreaming: A Neuroimaging
     * Domhoff, G.W., 2001, “A New Neurocognitive Theory of Dreams”,
       Dreaming, 11: 13–33.
     * –––, 2003, The Scientific Study of Dreams: Neural Networks,
     * –––, 2011, “The Neural Substrate for Dreaming: Is It a Subsystem of
     * Dreisbach, C., 2000, “Dreams in the History of Philosophy”,
       Dreaming, 10(1): 31–41.
       Steiger, P. Sämann, H. Obrig, and M. Czisch, 2011, “Dreamed
       Correlates of Dream Lucidity Obtained from Contrasting Lucid versus
     * Driver, J., 2007, “Dream immorality”, Philosophy, 82(1): 5–22.
     * Dunlop, C.E.M. (ed.), 1977, Philosophical Essays on Dreaming.
       Blagrove, 2013, “Dreaming and Insight”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
     * Ellis, H., 1911, The World of Dreams, London: Constable & Company
       Activation during Dreamed Hand Clenching: A Pilot Study on EEG
       “Time for Actions in Lucid Dreams: Effects of Task Modality,
     * Fazekas, P., and G. Nemeth, 2018, “Dream experiences and the neural
     * Fazekas, P., G. Nemeth, and M. Overgaard, 2019, “White dreams are
       made of colours: What studying contentless dreams can teach about
       the neural basis of dreaming and conscious experiences”, Sleep
     * Flanagan, O., 1995, “Deconstructing Dreams: The Spandrels of
     * –––, 2000, Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams, and the Evolution of the
       “Dreaming and Episodic Memory: A Functional Dissociation?”, Journal
     * Foulkes, D., 1978, A Grammar of Dreams, New York: Basic Books.
     * –––, 1993a, “Children’s Dreaming”, in Dreaming as Cognition, C.
     * –––, 1993b, “Dreaming and REM Sleep”, Journal of Sleep Research,
     * –––, 1999, Children’s Dreaming and the Development of
       Christoff, 2013, “Dreaming as Mind Wandering: Evidence from
     * Frankfurt, H.G., 1970, Demons, Dreamers, and Madmen: The Defense of
     * Galen, On Diagnosis in Dreams, L. Pearcy (ed.), <available online>.
     * Gerrans, P., 2012, “Dream Experience and a Revisionist Account of
     * –––, 2014, “Pathologies of Hyperfamiliarity in Dreams, Delusions
     * Globus, G.G., 1987, Dream Life, Wake Life: The Human Condition
       Through Dreams, New York: State University of New York Press.
     * Gottesmann, C., 2006, “The Dreaming Sleep Stage: A New
     * Gregory, J.C., 1916, “Dreams as Psychical Explosions”, Mind,
     * –––, 1918, “The Dream of ‘Frustrated Effort’: A Suggested
     * Hacking, I., 2001, “Dreams in Place”, Journal of Aesthetics and Art
     * Hall, C.S., 1981, “Do We Dream during Sleep? Evidence for the
     * Hartmann, E., 1998, Dreams and Nightmares: The New Theory on the
       Origin and Meaning of Dreams, Cambridge: Perseus Books.
     * Hearne, K., 1978, Lucid Dreams: An Electro-Physiological and
     * Hering, J., 1947, “Concerning Image, Idea, and Dream”, Philosophy
     * Hobson, J.A., 1988, The Dreaming Brain, New York: Basic Books.
     * –––, 1999, Dreaming as Delirium. How the Brain Goes Out of Its
     * –––, 2009, “REM Sleep and Dreaming: Towards a Theory of
     * Hobson, J. and K. Friston, 2012, “Waking and Dreaming
     * Hobson, J., E.F. Pace-Schott, and R. Stickgold, 2000, “Dreaming and
       New Science of Dreaming, Parma: Mattioli 1885.
     * Hodges, M. and W.R. Carter, 1969, “Nelson on Dreaming a Pain”,
       of Concern- and Nonconcern-related Verbal Stimuli into Dream
       of Color in Dreams: A Preliminary Investigation”, International
       Journal of Dream Research, 3(1): 80–90.
     * Hunter, J. F. M., 1983, “The difference between dreaming and being
       Dreaming”, The Philosophical Quarterly, 58(232): 519–527.
     * –––, 2009, “Dreaming and Imagination”, Mind & Language, 24(1):
     * Jouvet, M., 1999, The Paradox of Sleep: The Story of Dreaming, L.
       Cognition: Feeling and Character Identification in Dreaming”,
       “Dreaming and Waking Consciousness: A Character Recognition Study”,
     * Kantor, J., 1970, “Pinching and Dreaming”, Philosophical Studies,
     * Keefer, M.H., 1996, “The Dreamer’s Path: Descartes and the
       2016, “A template model of embodiment while dreaming: Proposal of a
     * Koulack, D., 1969, “Effects of Somatosensory Stimulation on Dream
     * Kramer, M., 2007, The Dream Experience: A Systematic Exploration,
     * LaBerge, S., 2007, “Lucid Dreaming”, in Barrett and McNamara 2007a:
       “Lucid Dreaming Verified by Volitional Communication during REM
       visual targets distinguishes lucid REM sleep dreaming and waking
       and I. Arnulf, 2010, “Do the Eyes Scan Dream Images during Rapid
     * Levin, R. and T.A. Nielsen, 2009, “Nightmares, Bad Dreams, and
       Dreaming”, Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18(2):
       “The Dreaming Brain/Mind, Consciousness and Psychosis”,
     * –––, 2011b, “Bizarreness in Dream Reports and Waking Fantasies of
     * Llinás, R. and D. Paré, 1991, “Of Dreaming and Wakefulness”,
     * Malcolm, N., 1956, “Dreaming and Skepticism”, The Philosophical
     * –––, 1959, Dreaming, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
     * Matthews, G.B., 1981, “On Being Immoral in a Dream”, Philosophy,
     * McGinn, C., 2004, Mindsight: Image, Dream, Meaning, Cambridge, MA &
     * –––, 2005a, “The Matrix of Dreams”, in Grau 2005: 62–70.
     * –––, 2013b, “Why Are Dreams Interesting for Philosophers? The
     * Mullane, H., 1965, “Moral Responsibility for Dreams”, Dialogue,
     * –––, 1966, “Dreaming as an Action”, Dialogue, 5(02): 239–242.
     * Murzyn, E., 2008, “Do We Only Dream in Colour? A Comparison of
       Reported Dream Colour in Younger and Older Adults with Different
     * Nagel, T., 1959, “Dreaming”, Analysis, 19(5): 112–116.
       A Multidimensional Approach to Understanding Dreaming”, Journal of
     * –––, 2010, “Dream Analysis and Classification: The Reality
     * –––, 2017, “Microdream neurophenomenology”, Neuroscience of
     * Nielsen, T.A. and J. Lara-Carrasco, 2007, “Nightmares, Dreaming,
       of Dreaming?”, Nature, 437(7063): 1286–1289.
       Stimulation during REM Sleep Alters Dream Limb Activity and Body
     * Nielsen, T.A., C. Svob, and D. Kuiken, 2009, “Dream-Enacting
     * Nir, Y. and G. Tononi, 2010, “Dreaming and the Brain: From
       serial awakenings as a new paradigm for studies on NREM dreaming”,
     * O’Shaughnessy, B., 2002, “Dreaming”, Inquiry, 45: 399–432.
     * Pace-Schott, E.F., 2007, “The Frontal Lobes and Dreaming”, in
     * –––, 2013, “Dreaming as a Story-Telling Instinct”, Frontiers in
       White, 2001, “Definitions of Dream: A Paradigm for Comparing Field
       Descriptive Specific Studies of Dream”, Dreaming, 11: 195–202.
       dreaming: bridging phenomenology and neuroscience”, Phenomenology
       “Sleep and Dreaming Are for Important Matters”, Frontiers in
     * Prasad, H.S., 2000, “Dreamless Sleep and Soul: a controversy
     * –––, 1962 [1986], “Dreaming and ‘Depth Grammar’”, in Analytical
       of Dreams”, in The Neuropsychology of Sleep and Dreaming, J.S.
     * Reed, T.M., 1979, “Dreams, Scepticism and Waking Life”, in Body,
       “Self-Representation and Bizarreness in Children’s Dream Reports
     * Revonsuo, A., 2000, “The Reinterpretation of Dreams: An
       Evolutionary Hypothesis of the Function of Dreaming”, Behavioral
     * –––, 2005, “The Self in Dreams”, in The Lost Self. Pathologies of
       Bizarre Elements in Dreams”, Dreaming, 5:169–187.
     * Revonsuo, A. and K. Tarkko, 2002, “Binding in Dreams. The
       Bizarreness of Dream Images and the Unity of Consciousness”,
       Machine – Dreaming as a Simulation of Social Reality”, in T.
       Views and Narrative Fabrication of Dreams”, Frontiers in
       agency and ownership over dream thought”, Psychology of
     * –––, 2018a, “Enactive or inactive? Cranially envatted dream
     * –––, 2018b, “How bizarre? A pluralist approach to dream content”,
     * –––, forthcoming, “Dreaming of a stable world: vision and action in
       Perspectives in Dreams”, Philosophy Compass, 8(11): 1041–1053.
       Somatosensory Stimulation on Dream Content in Gymnasts and Control
       Dreaming, 8: 125–134.
       D’Agostino, and J.A. Hobson, 2007, “The Dream as a Model for
       Sleep and Dreams, Minneapolis: Extreme Nights, LLC.
       and Dreaming: Emotional Intensity and Emotional Tone of the
     * –––, 2010, “History of Dream Research: The Dissertation ‘Entstehung
       der Träume (Origin of Dreams)’ of Wilhelm Weygandt Published in
       1893”, International Journal of Dream Research, 3(1): 95–97.
       Activities and Dream Activities”, Consciousness and Cognition, 12:
       We Think Dreams Are in Black and White Due to Memory Problems?”,
       Dreaming, 18(3): 175–180.
     * Schröder, S., 1997, “The Concept of Dreaming: On Three Theses by
     * Schwitzgebel, E., 2002, “Why Did We Think We Dreamed in Black and
     * –––, 2003, “Do People Still Report Dreaming in Black and White? An
     * Schwitzgebel, E., C. Huang, and Y. Zhou, 2006, “Do We Dream in
       Color? Cultural Variations and Skepticism”, Dreaming, 16(1): 36–42.
     * Sebastián, M., 2014a, “Dreams: An Empirical Way to Settle the
     * –––, 2014b, “Not a HOT dream”, In Consciousness inside and out:
       correlates of dreaming”, Nature Neuroscience, 20(6): 872.
     * Siegler, F.A., 1967, “Remembering Dreams”, The Philosophical
     * Singer, E.A., 1924, “On Pain in Dreams”, The Journal of Philosophy,
     * Solms, M., 1997, The Neuropsychology of Dreams: A
     * –––, 2000, “Dreaming and REM Sleep Are Controlled by Different
     * Soteriou, M., forthcoming, “Dreams, agency, and judgement”,
       dreaming?”, Dreaming, 29(3): 220.
     * Stone, J., 1984, “Dreaming and Certainty”, Philosophical Studies,
       involvement of the prefrontal cortex in lucid dreaming: a tDCS
       “The Phenomenology of Lucid Dreaming: An Online Survey”, American
     * Symons, D., 1993, “The Stuff that Dreams Aren’t Made of: Why
       Wake-State and Dream-State Sensory Experiences Differ”, Cognition,
       Images, dreams, hallucinations, and active, imaginative
     * Thompson, E., 2014, Waking, dreaming, being: Self and consciousness
     * –––, 2015, “Dreamless Sleep, the Embodied Mind, and Consciousness –
     * Valberg, J.J., 2007, Dream, Death, and the Self, Princeton &
     * Valli, K., 2008, Threat Simulation: The Function of Dreaming?,
     * van de Castle, R.L., 1994, Our Dreaming Mind, New York: Ballantine
     * van Eeden, F., 1913, “A Study of Dreams”, Proceedings of the
       Dreaming: A State of Consciousness with Features of Both Waking and
       Non-Lucid Dreaming”, Sleep, 32(9): 1191–1200.
       Hobson, 2013, “Measuring consciousness in dreams: the lucidity and
       consciousness in dreams scale”, Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1):
       lucid dreaming? – Recent advances and questions for future
       dreams through frontal low current stimulation of gamma activity”,
     * Wamsley, E.J., 2013, “Dreaming, Waking Conscious Experience, and
       Events into Dreams”, in Stickgold and Walker 2009: 330–336.
     * –––, 2010, “Dreaming and Offline Memory Processing”, Current
       Stickgold, 2010, “Dreaming of a Learning Task Is Associated with
       Stickgold, 2014, “Delusional confusion of dreaming and reality in
       Model of Dreaming”, Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9:
     * –––, 2013, “Reporting Dream Experience: Why (Not) to Be Skeptical
       about Dream Reports”, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7,
     * –––, 2015a, Dreaming: A Conceptual Framework for Philosophy of Mind
     * –––, 2015b, “Just in time – dreamless sleep experience as pure
     * –––, 2018, “Predictive brains, dreaming selves, sleeping bodies:
       how the analysis of dream movement can inform a theory of self-and
       world-simulation in dreams”, Synthese, 195(6): 2577–2625.
     * Windt, J.M. and T. Metzinger, 2007, “The Philosophy of Dreaming and
       the Dream State?”, in Barrett and McNamara 2007c: 193–248.
     * Windt, J.M. and V. Noreika, 2011, “How to Integrate Dreaming into a
       control in lucid dreams”, in The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous
       Thought: Mind-Wandering, Creativity, and Dreaming, Oxford: Oxford
       disappear in dreamless sleep?”, Trends in cognitive sciences,
       in R.L. Woods and H.B. Greenhouse (eds.), The New World of Dreams,
     * Philosophy of Dreaming, entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of
     * Dreams, PhilPapers collection.
     * Dreams and Skepticism, PhilPapers collection.
