          + Sleep and Dreaming
          + Sleep and Dreaming
     * Sleep and Dreaming
Do You Dream Every Night?
   10 fascinating facts you should know about dreams
   we dream. Many theories exist to explain why we dream, but researchers
   still don't know for sure. Some believe dreams have symbolic meaning,
   What scientists do know is that just about everyone dreams every time
   they sleep, and those dreams can be fascinating, exciting, terrifying,
   Most of those dreams are forgotten within minutes of waking. Most
   people dream in color, but some dream in black and white. Our dream
   can control what they dream about as if they were writing the script.
   If you've ever wondered what makes dreams so fascinating and sometimes
   strange, exploring some dream facts can help you gain greater insight
We Dream Every Night
   which is when we dream.
   Adults and babies alike dream for around two hours per night, even if
   usually have several dreams each night, each typically lasting for five
   dreaming.
   When Dreams Merge With Your Waking Life—What to Know About Deja Reve
We Forget Most of Our Dreams
7 Theories on Why We Dream Simplified
   We forget up to 95% of all dreams shortly after waking.
   According to one theory about why dreams are so difficult to remember,
   stage in which dreaming occurs.
   We might also forget our dreams because of changes in the levels of
   Yet another study found a link between dream recall and the brain
   dreams.
Not All Dreams Are in Color
   According to a 2017 study, around 50% of people report dreaming in
   color almost all of the time. However, they also suggested they dream
   suggested that roughly 12% of people dream only in black-and-white.
   People younger than 25 rarely report dreaming in black and white.
   However, people older than 55 report black-and-white dreams about 25%
   that people in the 1940s rarely reported dreaming in color, supports
Men and Women Dream Differently
   Researchers have also found differences between men and women in dream
   content. In several studies, men reported dreaming about weapons
   significantly more often than women did, whereas women dreamed about
   Another study showed that men's dreams tend to have more aggressive
   content and physical activity, whereas women's dreams contain more
   Women tend to have slightly longer dreams with more characters. Men
   dream about other men twice as often as they do about women; women tend
   to dream about both sexes equally. Women also report having more
Animals Probably Dream
   swats its paws, it's dreaming. Although no one can say for sure,
   stages, so they probably do dream.
   Animals might not experience dreams in the same way as humans, however.
You Can Control Your Dreams
   A lucid dream is one in which you're aware that you're dreaming even
   Lucid dreaming is thought to be a combination of consciousness and REM
   sleep, during which you can direct or control the dream content.
   People can learn how to have lucid dreams using various techniques,
   including mnemonic induction of lucid dreams (MILD) and
   senses-initiated lucid dreams (SSILD). These involve waking up after
   five hours and repeating a phrase like "I will remember my dream" or
   lucid dreaming, and some are able to have lucid dreams frequently.
Negative Dreams Are More Common
   Researcher Calvin S. Hall, collected more than 50,000 dream accounts
   public in the 1990s by Hall's student, William Domhoff, the dream
   accounts reported many emotions during dreams.
   Several factors affect the emotional content of dreams, including
   positive and negative dreams.
   The most common emotion experienced in dreams is anxiety. Generally,
   How to Interpret Your Dreams
Blind People May Dream Visually
   seemed to experience visual imagery in their dreams, and they had eye
   movements that correlated to visual dream recall.
   participants, the blind participants reported the same dream
You're Paralyzed While Dreaming
   dreams while you're asleep. Basically, because motor neurons are not
Some Dreams Are Universal
   Although dreams are often influenced by personal experiences and may
   having similar themes in their dreams, although there may be
   For example, people from all over the world frequently dream about
   being chased, being attacked, or falling. Other common dream
   Why You Get Vivid Dreams and How to Stop Them
   Dreams can range from the fascinating to the anxiety-provoking to the
   "Why did I dream about *that*? While there's a lot we still don't know
   about dreaming, we have discovered a number of intriguing facts that
   can provide greater insights into how and why we dream.
     * Sleep and Dreaming
    3. Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Dreams decoded.
    4. National Sleep Foundation. How often do we dream?
    6. Becchetti A, Amadeo A. Why we forget our dreams: Acetylcholine and
    7. Vallat R, Eichenlaub J-B, Nicolas A, Ruby P. Dream recall frequency
    8. König N, Heizmann LM, Göritz AS, Schredl M. Colors in dreams and
       International Journal of Dream Research. 2017;Vol 10:59-64.
    9. Murzyn E. Do we only dream in colour? A comparison of reported
       dream colour in younger and older adults with different experiences
   10. Schwitzgebel E. Do people still report dreaming in black and white?
   11. Mathes J, Schredl M. Gender differences in dream content: Are they
       related to personality? International Journal of Dream Research.
       dream content at the cross-cultural, gender, and individual levels.
       dream-related aspects and beliefs in a large cohort of French
       students using a validated French version of the Mannheim Dream
   14. Manger PR, Siegel JM. Do all mammals dream? J Comp Neurol.
   15. Saunders DT, Roe CA, Smith G, Clegg H. Lucid dreaming incidence: A
   16. Hall CS, Domhoff GW, Blick KA, Weesner KE. The dreams of college
       men and women in 1950 and 1980: A comparison of dream contents and
   17. Salvesen L, Capriglia E, Dresler M, Bernardi G. Influencing dreams
       functional role of dreaming in emotional processes. Front Psychol.
       and visual dream recall in both congenitally blind and sighted
       adaptive function of dreams: a cross-cultural study. Sci Rep.
   22. Greater Good Magazine. What do dreams look like across cultures?
   What Are Stress Dreams?
   Activation-synthesis suggest brain activity leads to dreaming
   Activation-synthesis suggest brain activity leads to dreaming
   How Does the Activation-Synthesis Model Explain Dreams?
   Dreams About Cheating: Why They Happen and What to Do
   Manifest Content of Your Dreams
   How to lucid dream How to lucid dream
   4 Techniques to Achieve Lucid Dreams Tonight
   woman experiencing a fever dream woman experiencing a fever dream
   What Does It Mean to Have a Fever Dream?
   What Does It Mean When You Dream of Someone Who Passed Away?
   Lady sleeps in bed tossing turning in dream under blanket Lady sleeps
   in bed tossing turning in dream under blanket
   Why You Get Vivid Dreams and How to Stop Them
