   dreaming
How to Interpret Dreams You Have About Practically Anyone
   Have you ever woken up from a dream about a neighbor or a cousin or the
   dream about someone you’d expect to dream about, like an ex or a
   dream-interpretation practice might help. First, it’s important to know
   related to understanding our dreams.
   dream-centric spirituality. According to Amanda Takwapu, a spiritual
   cosmovisions — ways of approaching and understanding dreamwork — might
   trying to understand a dream is instead seen as a conversation between
   the dream, the person who experienced it, and anyone they’re talking to
   For Alex Shiflett, a licensed mental-health clinician and dream doula,
   Jung as well as various spiritual dream-interpretation methods and the
   use of dreams in creative practices. “My practice is rooted in the
   philosophy that everyone in the dream is you; this is also related to
   It’s okay if you’re unsure which type of dreamwork practice makes the
   dreamwork, Takwapu says expanding access to traditional knowledge is
   about your dreams, whether that’s through a dream journal or good
   app to describe your dream as soon as you wake up — more on that below
   Indigenous mystic and writer behind the Dream Interpretation for
   Dummies newsletter, and Lauri Quinn Loewenberg, professional dream
   envision in our dreams the most. Whether it’s an ex, a parent, a
If you want to start working with your dreams …
   For Takwapu, remembering and discussing dreams is second nature; it’s
   start talking, you’re sharing your dreams with your mother or aunties —
   share their dreams, articulating is going to be the strongest thing
   that you can do.” While Takwapu appreciates dream journals as a way of
   understanding broader trends in your dreaming life and uses one
   herself, she believes that speaking out loud about your dreams, with
   dialogue with them. “When we’re dreaming, we’re not vocally dialoguing
   Shiflett agrees that any attempt to understand your dream is best done
   in conversation. “Because dreams show us our blind spots, it is best to
   do this practice with someone who works with dreams,” they say. “You
   wake up, allowing you to stay close to the dream. They advise telling
   colors you saw to the narrative thread the dream followed. Most
   you think about the dream or particular images in it — what
   In Guarani tradition, how a dream makes you feel matters more than
   things in our dreams, but it’s very important for us to remember how we
   elders or to our family members of what that dream could signify.” But
   what if you can’t remember your dreams at all? According to Shiflett,
   you struggle remembering your dreams, tell yourself every night before
   bed that you will remember your dreams,” they suggest. “Keep practicing
   dreams is like remembering where you put your keys — not remembering
If you want to know why you dreamed about someone specific …
   “When you dream about someone, you are having subjective and objective
   experiences of this person,” says Shiflett. “Sometimes we dream about
   associations with the person.” For them, interpreting the dream starts
   that’s being told: “Dream interpretation is a practice in tuning in
   dream is you, you can try putting yourself back in the dream as the
   person you dreamed about. “If you dream of someone, it means you’re
   plays in your life and in your dreams more broadly.
   connect with how you felt during the dream. “Did you feel safe with
   this person? Did you feel hesitancy around this person in the dream?
   understanding the dream’s message.
If you’re curious about the connections between dreaming and spirituality …
   For some dream analysts, working with dreams is simply a psychological
   practice based entirely on the dreamer’s inner workings and psyche. But
   in many traditions, dreamwork is a spiritual practice. For Shiflett,
   it’s a bit of both; they believe that every aspect of a dream comes
   rituals to tune in to the frequency,” they say. “Dreams can be part of
   our dreams and the spiritual realm. That can be understood even from
   the Guarani word for dream, Aetxara’u. The prefix, Aetxa, means “to see
   beyond this material realm/plane.” Dreams aren’t just a channel to the
   says. “And we have a relation to it in our waking world and the dream
If you’re dreaming about someone repeatedly …
   A one-off dream about another person is one thing. But when it becomes
   repeating dreams about someone specific, Takwapu recommends first
   thinking about how the person you’re dreaming about is related to you
   thereof. “If they’re repeatedly coming to you in dreams, that’s
   when discussing how that person is represented in your dreams and in
   or talk to them about what’s happening in your dreams, Takwapu says
   dialogue that you guys are meant to have, and maybe this dream is going
   dreams, or also reach out to that person if it’s safe to do so.”
   Shiflett says that our dreams often involve repeated themes and
   dreaming of others that we might not know the whole meaning of until
   hindsight,” they explain. “Notice how often you might dream of a
   certain person. Does this person in your dream always play the same
If you dream about a stranger …
   Some of the most confusing dreams are the ones in which the subject is
   familiar with the people that you’re dreaming about — to not
   Shiflett says that in their practice, dreams about unfamiliar people
   can be related to the Jungian archetypes found in dreams: the self, the
   was doing, their role in the dream, and potentially other associations
   So does the tone of the dream matter as much as who was in it? Takwapu
   during a dream without closely inspecting them. Instead of doing that,
   that some dreams are good dreams or nightmares, that’s where shadow
   The feelings a dream brought up can still be spiritually significant.
   practicing that discernment, and deepening your awareness of the dream
   realm, can help you develop a stronger sense of when a dream has a
   or maybe it’s reminding you to share that dream with them,” she says.
   “A lot of the time, we believe when we share our dreams with other
   we didn’t dream about them directly.”
If you dream about your ex …
   “The most common ex that we tend to dream about is our first love. In
   fact, we’ll dream about that person even 50 years since we’ve been with
   showing up in our dreams is that they symbolize what first love feels
   According to Fourkiller, ex dreams are all about the past. “Not to get
   millennial friends, and that means I have been asked about dreaming
   ignore my dream advice, I will probably not be as happy to again. Ex
   dreams are simply about the past, about what we’ve left there. About
   contact, but they’re still finding you in the dream realm, and that’s a
   do with your protection, your safety, in both the dream realm and the
   dreaming about, that in itself can be an indicator of what the dream
   dream, maybe that means there is a conversation you need to have with
If you dream about your mother …
   crone. When it comes to dreams with archetypes, sometimes the most
   Razor in that respect. So when dreaming of a mother (or your mother) we
   ourselves, a relationship, a dream, etc. If dreaming about your mother
   According to Loewenberg, dreams about mothers are more common than
   those about fathers. “We tend to dream about the mother more than the
   father figure. In fact, on average, we tend to dream of our mothers or
   dream mean, that all figures actually represent a part of yourself. The
   dreaming mind will show us the different bits of our personality in the
   form of a person. So, that being said, if you’re a mother and you dream
   role as mom. Pay attention to how she is in the dream. Is she helpful?
   in the dream is a reflection of how you are seeing yourself as a mom.”
If you dream about your co-workers …
   Loewenberg. “And so whatever is going on in the dream will reflect
   person that shows up in your dream — what stands out to you about this
   you’re dreaming about is a tech expert and is really good at fixing
   While Fourkiller agrees that the dream about your co-worker “could
   life, she adds that “work dreams always signify to me a rootedness
   rough. I think these kind of dreams can present a message that, ‘Hey,
If you dream about a significant other …
   the dream,” instructs Loewenberg. For example, a really common dream
   Fourkiller also urges you to home in on the details of your dream. “It
   depends on the dream, the emotions behind it, but a significant other
   dream can be a happy thing, an ‘I’m so in love with the person’ thing,
   “It’s very important to think about how you felt in the dream, how you
   felt about your interaction with them in the dream, and how you feel in
   identify how you feel in this dream, it’s going to be able to give you
If you dream about your significant other cheating …
   dream seems to be coming out of left field and you have no reason at
   all to suspect them, the dream doesn’t mean that they are cheating. It
   “Don’t jump to conclusions! Just like a death dream, this doesn’t mean
If you dream about your significant other dying …
   “Don’t look at that literally! Dreams are symbolic,” Loewenberg
   out. In a dream, death represents something ending or changing. So, is
If you dream about someone who has already died …
   “If you dream of someone who has died, they will likely represent a
   dream of them, they could represent who you were back when you were
If you dream about someone famous …
   “Celebrities are really fun to dream about! One of the most common
   dreams of a celebrity is that you’re friends with them and you’re
   Fourkiller says this dream may actually be about your own desire for
On the celebs who appear in dreams most often:
   “I remember there was a time when Oprah was the most dreamt of
   and clients are much less likely to submit a dream for interpretation
   The takeaway: Fourkiller notes that even the silly dream you deem
   unworthy of interpretation still has significance. “Not every dream
   necessarily has a meaning, but all dreams are important. Even if
   whether a dream is worth interpreting is up to the dreamer themself,
   thoughts, and yes, always, your dreams.”
   In general, Fourkiller says dream interpretation can be an incredibly
     * Lauri Quinn Loewenberg is a certified dream analyst and author of
       three books on the subject, most recently Dream On It: Unlock Your
       Dreams Change Your Life. She has appeared on The View, Good Morning
       Dream Interpretation for Dummies, “where Dear Abby meets Native
     * Alex Shiflett, licensed mental health clinician and dream doula.
More Dreams Deciphered
     * What Does It Mean If You’re Dreaming About Work?
     * What Is Lucid Dreaming, and How Do I Do It?
     * dreams
     * dreaming
   How to Interpret Dreams About Practically Anyone
