   #RSS

   Jonah Calinawan
   accountant artist mythologist
     * obituary
     * home
     * about
     * cyanotypes
     * blog

   © 2021 Jonah Calinawan
   All Rights Reserved
   Terms of Use | Privacy Policy

How to Analyze a Dream Using Jungian Dream Analysis

   Jul 17, 2020 / The Twelve Mysteries / carl jung / dream analysis
   Dreaming of ants begging for jungian dream analysis treatment,
   cyanotype I Dream of Ants. Cyanotype on Paper, 2020. Two Print sizes. ©
   Jonah Calinawan
   Buy a Print
   or License image

     Dreams are the guiding words of the soul. Why should I henceforth
     not love my dreams and not make their riddling images into objects
     of my daily consideration?

     Carl Jung, The Red Book

   Last weekend, I had a dream that mystified me so much that I had to
   analyze it.

   This article describes a step-by-step process in dream interpretation
   based on Carl Jung’s work. If you’ve ever wanted to understand your
   dreams, I recommend a good book to get you started.

   But first, I want to tell you about the dream.

The Dream

   I’m at work in an open-concept office where cubicles are in an assembly
   line formation. Each cubicle shares a middle partition with a
   mirror-cubicle on the other side. In this dream, I’m sitting on one
   side, while my co-worker Phillip is sitting opposite me on the other
   side.

   “Hey Jonah, do you want to sit beside me, or do you want to stay where
   you are on your side?” Phillip asks.

   As I’m debating the pros/cons of where I should sit, Reid, my boss,
   comes over and says, “Jonah, can I see you in my office?”

   So, I walk into his office, and I see a leather club chair. As I walk
   closer, I realize that the chair is teeming with ants and some sticky
   substance like honey or tree sap. I couldn’t tell which.

   “How am I going to sit on that? I would have to clean that off first.”
   I said to myself.

   Then, I woke up.

   I usually don’t remember my dreams, but this one was so vivid that I
   excitedly recounted it to my partner that Sunday morning. Later in the
   day, we walked around the Baltimore Inner Harbor, stopped at the newly
   opened Whole Foods at Harbor East, and decided to sit by the water for
   a bit. Picking a spot, I sat down on a wood bench. I looked down and
   couldn’t believe my eyes. Ants. I saw the ants from my dream.

Where Do Dreams Come From?

   In my research for this article, I was surprised that even in the 21st
   century, the “why” and “how” of dreams are largely undeveloped from the
   time of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. Of the two, I was attracted to
   Carl Jung’s theory. He considered dreams to be messages from the
   unconscious:

     “Dreams are impartial, spontaneous products of the unconscious
     psyche, outside the control of the will. They are pure nature; they
     show us the unvarnished, natural truth, and are therefore fitted, as
     nothing else is, to give us back an attitude that accords with our
     basic human nature when our consciousness has strayed too far from
     its foundations and run into an impasse.”

     Carl Jung, CW 10:317

   This is an exciting finding as I’m already curious about synchronicity
   and mythology. Now I can add dreams and the unconscious to the mix of
   mysteries.

   If dreams are messages from the unconscious, then what was my
   unconscious trying to say?

A Warning about Dream Analysis

   But before we begin, a word of caution. Dream analysis engages the
   unconscious, and it might bring up contents you don’t want to face.
   It’s not a game. Here’s what Jung had to say about it:

     We are greatly mistaken if we think that the unconscious is
     something harmless that could be made into an object of
     entertainment, a parlour game. Certainly the unconscious is not
     always and in all circumstances dangerous, but as soon as a neurosis
     is present it is a sign of a special heaping up of energy in the
     unconscious, like a charge that may explode. Here caution is
     indicated. One never knows what one may be releasing when one begins
     to analyse dreams. Something deeply buried and invisible may thereby
     be set in motion, very probably something that would have come to
     light sooner or later anyway—but again, it might not. It is as if
     one were digging an artesian well and ran the risk of stumbling on a
     volcano. When neurotic symptoms are present one must proceed very
     carefully.

     Carl Jung, CW 7:192

   In other words, please be careful. Stop if you sense that something is
   wrong. And if you are still interested in exploring dream
   interpretation, why not see a Jungian analyst in your area? That would
   be a good idea.

Step-by-Step Process for Interpreting Dreams

   The steps below are from a Jungian psychotherapist, Robert Johnson, who
   wrote Inner Work: Using Dreams and Active Imagination for Personal
   Growth (affiliate link). I read this book four years ago but had no
   interest in writing about it until now.
    1. Write the Dream in Detail
    2. Make Associations
    3. Connect Dream Images to What’s Happening Internally
    4. Interpret the Dream
    5. Do a Ritual to Make the Dream Concrete

Step 1 Write the Dream in Detail

   Write your dream immediately after waking up. Otherwise, you will
   forget. In the article Follow Your Bliss, I recommend keeping a
   journal. Dreams would be a great addition to that journal.

   Write down all the dream details even if they appear unimportant:
   setting, people, objects, dialogue, smells, sounds, color, and your
   “internal talk” and emotions while dreaming the dream.

Step 2 Make Associations

   The next step is to make associations. Think of the dream image and
   then write down everything that comes to mind. For example, in my
   dream, the “work setting” symbolized drudgery, stress, and competition.
   Do this for every dream detail you wrote down in your journal.

   Don’t consult a dream dictionary. Dream symbols are unique to you, so
   there is no sense in asking other people or reading about it. The only
   exception is if the dream contains archetypal motifs common to the
   human race. These would include characters like father, mother, child,
   wise old man, hero, maiden, or trickster. With archetypes, it doesn’t
   matter whether you are white, black, or brown. We come from the same
   ground and live and die under the same blue sky, so the meaning of
   archetypes will be the same.

Step 3 Connect Dream Images to What’s Happening Internally

   Just like when reading mythology, dreams are not meant to be
   interpreted literally. The language of dreams and the unconscious is
   the symbolic image. Therefore, the unconscious borrows images from your
   external environment to symbolize things in the dream. For example, in
   my dream, the characters Phillip and Reid do not actually refer to the
   real counterparts. Each character represents something else. Thus,
   dreams are usually about the interior world rather than the external
   one.

Step 4 Interpret the Dream

   Taking all the things you wrote before, interpret the dream. Remember
   that a dream is a coherent message from the unconscious cloaked in
   symbolism. When you interpret the dream and arrive at an interpretation
   that “clicks” or makes you say “a-ha,” then you’re on the right path. A
   couple of caveats:
     * Your unconscious will not send you a message that you already know
       or are conscious of. Thus the dream’s message should be a surprise
       to you.
     * If you arrive at a dream interpretation that is self-congratulatory
       and self-inflating, then that interpretation is probably incorrect.
     * If you arrive at an interpretation that blames others, then that
       interpretation is also incorrect. Dreams are about you and not
       others. Remember that all the characters in your dream represent
       aspects of yourself, even if they look like somebody you know.

Step 5 Do a Ritual to Make the Dream Concrete

   After interpreting the dream, honor it by doing something physical (and
   not just thinking about it). By doing something physical, you integrate
   the dream, which was unconscious, into your conscious waking life. The
   ritual is a way to send the message to your unconscious that you heard
   it. Write in your journal, pray, light a candle, or make art out of it.
   The physical act should not be loud or expensive. The smaller and the
   more intimate, the better.

My Dream Interpretation

   Now, I’m going to apply these steps to my dream. I cover a number of
   symbols from my dream: the work setting, the mirror-cubicle setup, my
   co-worker Phillip, my boss Reid, the leather club chair, the ants, and
   honey/tree sap. This is a work in progress, so the final interpretation
   may change the more I think about the dream in the coming days.

The Symbol of Work Setting

   The work setting confused me for a long time. I associated it with my
   accounting job, but I quit that last October to be a full-time artist.
   So, why did this dream show that I was back at my accounting job? That
   didn’t make any sense to me. Then it hit me: the work setting was a
   symbol. My unconscious borrowed the image of my former accounting job
   to symbolize my current job as an artist. Once I realized what the work
   setting meant, some of the other associations fell into place.

The Symbol of Mirror-Cubicle Setup

   I wrote down many associations for the mirror-cubicle setup but none
   clicked, so I set it aside and focused on my co-worker Phillip.

The Symbol of Phillip

   What did Phillip represent? After going over many associations, the
   following clicked. Phillip is a real person, and a long time ago as
   part of a get-to-know session at a company retreat, he shared with
   everyone that he was related to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the writer of
   Sherlock Holmes. Suddenly, the mirror-cubicle setup made sense! Phillip
   represented the writer side of my psyche. Phillip sat directly opposite
   me. What the dream was really asking was, “Hey Jonah, do you want to be
   a writer, or do you want to stay where you are on your side?”

The Symbol of Reid

   This “writer” interpretation solidified when I considered Reid. Reid is
   also a very real person, but not my real boss. Reid Callanan is the
   director of the Santa Fe Photographic Workshops. I’ve never met Reid,
   and yet here he was in my dream personifying photography.

The Symbol of the Leather Club Chair

   I associate the leather club chair with comfort, luxury, wealth, or a
   man-cave. The association that resonated the most was luxury. That
   luxurious leather chair invited me to sink into and be enveloped by it.
   It occurred to me that it was like the snake that appears in many
   mythologies around the world. The leather club chair was a trickster or
   troublemaker. This is the only dream detail that feels archetypal. Is
   this the definitive interpretation? I’m not feeling a click or an a-ha
   yet, but it feels very close.

The Symbol of the Ants

   I tried many associations for the ants and honey/tree sap, separately
   and together. I was stumped on this one. I took a break and walked
   outside. I think I was afraid of what I might discover if I continued
   interpreting the dream. I wanted the dream to have a positive outcome,
   I have to admit that.

   I wrote about the associations in my journal over a couple of days
   after the dream. In the end, the following strangely resonated:
     * The leather club chair is in Reid’s office and, therefore,
       represents the photography world.
     * The leather chair is like the archetypal snake as temptation
       inviting me to sit down, BUT
     * I can’t sit on the chair because it was overflowing with ants that
       bite.
     * In addition, the sticky tree sap could trap me like a Venus
       flytrap, and I would be unable to get up from the chair.

What Does this Dream Mean?

   Taking all the above into account, I now believe that this dream is
   sending a message that there is a tug-of-war between photography and
   writing in the interior landscape of my unconscious. I was not aware of
   this, but I sense that this conclusion is true. The dream seems to be
   saying that I should not sit on the photography chair because of the
   biting ants and the sticky tree sap. I hesitated moving to the writer
   chair, so that appears out as well. The dream is saying that I have to
   find my own path: it’s not photography, and it’s not writing.

   What is interesting about the dream is that it actually had three
   chairs: the chair I was sitting on at the beginning of the dream, the
   writer chair, and the photographer chair. The question now is, what
   did the first chair represent? I don’t know. No other characters spoke
   during the dream. I will have to think about it in the coming days.
   Usually in dream interpretation, the unconscious leaves a little clue
   as to what the solution is, but it’s escaping me at the moment.

   In the meantime, I completed a ritual to acknowledge this dream. I
   created cyanotype art from it.

Interested in Analyzing Your Dream?

   I hope you found this article helpful in describing how to interpret a
   dream. This article barely scratches the surface of Carl Jung dream
   analysis approach. To know more, I highly recommend reading Johnson’s
   Inner Work: Using Dreams and Active Imagination for Personal
   Growth (affiliate link). Good luck!

Update: The Symbol of The Third Chair!

   I had another dream on August 6, 2020, that clarified the meaning of
   the third chair. Read The Dream That Changed My Life.

   102 likes -
     * reddit icon
     * linked in icon
     * facebook icon
     * twitter icon

Read Comments

     * Angelica | Takanta
       Angelica | Takanta 5 years ago ↑2
       I've always been fascinated with dream interpretations, so I'm glad
       to hear about the Jungian approach. I didn't know about the rituals
       to reinforce the dreams, so I'll dig a bit deeper into them.
       Reply
     * Dr Ronnie Lowenstein
       Dr Ronnie Lowenstein 5 years ago ↑1
       Bravo for you in pursuing passions
       I cheer you!
       Reply

   Life Lessons from David Hockney and His Views on Photography

   Synchronicity Quotes

Follow Your Bliss: Read More

   Synchronicity Examples
   Three Rational Reasons to Believe in Synchronicity
   The Dream That Changed My Life

   © 2021 Jonah Calinawan. All Rights Reserved.
   Terms of Use | Privacy Policy

   Cookies are used to make this website work and to enhance your
   experience. To learn more about the types of cookies this website uses,
   see our Cookie Policy. You can provide consent by clicking the "I
   Consent" button or by canceling this cookie notice.
   (BUTTON) I Consent (BUTTON) Manage Cookies
   Close

   Cookies are used to make this website work and to enhance your
   experience. To learn more about the types of cookies this website uses,
   see our Cookie Policy. We need your consent to use marketing cookies.
   Marketing cookies are used to track visitors across websites. The
   intention is to display ads (via third party services) that are
   relevant and engaging for individual users. Please select the checkbox
   below to indicate your consent.
   [ ] I consent
   [ ] I do not consent
   (BUTTON) Save Preferences
   Your cookie preferences have been saved
