   Ian Wallace Dreams Logo Ian Wallace Dreams Logo
     * About
          + Dream Psychologist
          + The Complete A to Z Dictionary of Dreams
          + The Top 100 Dreams
          + Decode Your Dreams
          + How To Dream
     * Dreams
          + About Dreams
               o What Is A Dream?
               o Why Do We Dream?
               o The Top Ten Dreams
               o Nightmares
               o Children's Dreams
               o Celebrity Dreams
               o Dream Self Analysis
               o Dreams And Emotions
               o Dreams And Sleep
               o Sleep And Wellbeing
          + Common Dreams
               o Being Chased
               o Teeth Falling Out
               o Toilet Troubles
               o Naked In Public
               o Late For An Exam
               o Flying
               o Falling
               o Out Of Control Vehicle
               o Discovering A Room
               o Being Late
          + Familiar Dreams
               o Searching
               o Precarious Position
               o Falling In Love
               o Haunted By Ghosts
               o Ex-Lover Returns
               o Aircraft Crash
               o Children In Danger
               o Public Performance
               o Tidal Wave
               o Death and Dying
     * Guides
     * Journal
     * Contact

IAN WALLACE

DREAM PSYCHOLOGIST

A DREAM IS JUST A DREAM UNTIL YOU PUT IT INTO ACTION

   The word dream has two meanings in our language. Dreams can mean the
   nightly phenomena that we all create and can also be our greatest life
   ambitions. Although these two meanings seem quite different, they are
   fundamentally connected by a deeper level of self-awareness. By
   exploring your dreams and becoming more aware of what they mean, you
   naturally connect with practical ways to consistently fulfil your
   deepest aspirations.

About Ian Wallace

   ABOUT IAN WALLACE

   Ian Wallace is a best-selling author and popular broadcaster on the
   subject of dreams and psychology. Ian is widely acclaimed in the media
   for his live dream analysis, performed with an expert empathy and
   immediacy that entertains, informs and educates. He regularly appears
   on television, on radio and in print, where is consistently recognised
   and applauded for his articulacy, his accuracy and his authority. Ian
   is the originator of the Dream Connection Process, a uniquely powerful
   method that enables anyone to connect the imagery and symbolism that
   they create in their dreams to opportunities in waking life where they
   can use this insight to make a healthy difference.

About Dreams

   ABOUT DREAMS

   Your dreams reflect the fundamental patterns of your waking life and,
   although your nightly dreams and your daily life may seem to have no
   connection, the word ‘dream’ also means your waking hopes and
   aspirations, as well as your night-time adventures. Even though the
   intentional pursuit of your waking dreams and the natural creation of
   your nocturnal dreams may seem to be entirely separate, they are both
   primarily driven by a deeper level of self-awareness that we all
   possess. This more elemental understanding of yourself is a natural
   human quality and is known as your unconscious awareness.

About Psychology

   ABOUT PSYCHOLOGY

   When exploring dreams, it can be all too easy to become fixated on the
   dream and find yourself ignoring the dreamer who is creating all the
   dreams. To really understand the meanings and messages from the dreams,
   it is incredibly helpful to have an understanding of the dreamer and
   their potential behaviour patterns. Psychology is the study of human
   behaviour and goes beyond the purely conscious and physical
   manifestations of what it means to be human. Although psychological
   studies can be complex explorations with many apparent contradictions,
   the basics of psychology are who you are, what you need and what you
   believe.

DREAMS DON'T HAPPEN TO YOU, YOU HAPPEN TO YOUR DREAMS

   DREAMS DON'T HAPPEN TO YOU, YOU HAPPEN TO YOUR DREAMS

   Dreams don’t just happen to you, you actually happen to your dreams.
   You create everything in your dreams. Every person you encounter, every
   place you go, every event you experience is generated by your
   unconscious self. By understanding why you create your unique dream
   content, you invariably achieve a profound understanding of who you
   really are, what you really need, and what you really believe.

   This is also true for your dreams in waking life. Your greatest
   ambitions and deepest aspirations don’t just happen to you – you have
   to actively create them. By using the unconscious understanding you
   create every night in your dreams, you can connect far more deeply and
   successfully with your lifetime ambitions and aspirations.

IAN'S DREAM BOOKS

The Top 100 Dreams

   THE TOP 100 DREAMS

   The Top 100 Dreams: The Dreams We All Have And What They Really Mean is
   Ian’s internationally best-selling dream book, now available in 14
   different languages around the world.

Be Your Own Dream Expert

   BE YOUR OWN DREAM EXPERT

   The Complete A to Z Dictionary of Dreams: Be Your Own Dream Expert is
   Ian’s best-selling and definitive modern dream dictionary.

Decode Your Dreams

   DECODE YOUR DREAMS

   Decode Your Dreams empowers you with all you need to know, from
   unlocking your unconscious and learning how it influences your
   experiences, to creating positive life changes in light of these
   insights.

IAN'S MEDIA DREAM JOURNAL

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DREAMS

   Delve into the intriguing realm of dreams and the unconscious mind with
   renowned dream psychologist Ian Wallace in this episode of Mind Cake.
   Join us as we unravel the complexities of dreaming, exploring how our
   dreams are not mere happenstance but rather a reflection of our
   emotional landscapes and conscious decisions.
   Read More

LEGO - DREAM CRAFTING

   Lego - Dream Crafting

   Dream Psychologist, Ian Wallace, who has analysed over 400,000 dreams
   across his 30 years of research, explains that children can guide their
   dreams by using a plethora of skills developed in the real world. This
   can be done by tapping into their creativity and confidence more,
   particularly through three methods: Dream Play, Imaginal Play and
   Active Play.
   Read More

XBOX OUTERNET AUDIO-VISUAL IMMERSIVE EXPERIENCE

   Witness first-hand how the Xbox Series X can #PowerYourDreams. Journey
   through an immersive audio-visual experience, curated by leading dream
   psychologist Dr Ian Wallace, and unleash the power of your dreams.
   Read More

THE MEANING BEHIND YOUR NIGHTMARES

   What does it mean to dream that you're being knitted into a house? Or a
   passenger in an out of control car? 😱

   Vinny & Cate explore your nightmares with psychologist Ian Wallace for
   a Halloween special. Delve into your subconscious this spooky season...
   🎃 Read More

FAST COMPANY, WORK DREAMS

   Fast Company Magazine, Work Dreams

   As we sleep, our unconscious mind often reflects on the things which we
   are unable to or unwilling to face during the day. And since we spend a
   big chunk of our waking lives at work—and given that we are often
   unable to express our true emotions in professional settings—it should
   come as no surprise that work-related dreams are incredibly common.
   Read More

THE DREAM TEAM, BBC RADIO, 04-10-23

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Ulster in Belfast
   with Vinny Hurrell and Cate Conway.
   Read More

THE GUARDIAN, 20-09-23

   Guardian Bus Dream

   An excerpt from a lengthy Guardian article that suggests dreams are
   impossible to make sense of, although this dreamer's experience would
   suggest otherwise.
   Read More

THE DREAM TEAM, BBC RADIO, 06-09-23

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Ulster in Belfast
   with Vinny Hurrell and Cate Conway.
   Read More

COSMOPOLITAN SEX DREAMS

   Cosmopolitan Sex Dreams

   Dreams about sex usually have very little to do with any sexual
   experiences in waking life. Instead, sex dreams are all about what sex
   really means to us, what a psychologist termS as the symbolic
   significance.
   Read More

THE DREAM TEAM, BBC RADIO, 02-08-23

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Ulster in Belfast
   with Vinny Hurrell and Cate Conway.
   Read More

WEDNESDAYS WE DRINK WINE

   Exploring the real meanings of relationship dreams with Melissa Tattam
   and Sophie Habboo at Wednesdays We Drink Wine.
   Read More

THE DREAM TEAM, BBC RADIO, 03-05-23

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Ulster in Belfast
   with Vinny Hurrell and Cate Conway.
   Read More

DREAM SURGERY, BBC RADIO SCOTLAND, 03-04-23

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Scotland in
   Glasgow with Connie McLaughlin.
   Read More

SUPERHUMANIZE - WHY DO WE DREAM?

   'I am certain that most of you who are listening have often wondered
   about your dreams, where they come from and what they mean and why you
   dream at all. My guest today has answers to these questions and some of
   them are as surprising as they are enlightening'.
   Read More

A METAPHYSICAL REFLECTION - THE REAL DEAL

   'I was honestly a little skeptical this is going to be so frou-frou but
   the dude was legit. Legit, I mean crazy legit. He's an encyclopedia,
   walking encyclopedia of dreams. I was like, holy man, this Ian Wallace
   is the real deal, real deal, that was a that was a very insightful
   moment'.
   Read More

THIS MORNING DREAMS 25-03-22

   Exploring and explaining what viewer's dreams really mean on ITV's This
   Morning with Alison Hammond and Dermot O'Leary, from my studio in
   Edinburgh.
   Read More

DR. IAN WALLACE - DREAMS ARE THE ULTIMATE SELFIE

   What are dreams? Are they just random thoughts that pop into our heads
   while we sleep? Or are they a way for our subconscious to communicate
   with us? Ian Wallace, psychologist and author, joins Rainn Wilson and
   Reza Aslan to discuss the science behind dreams and what they mean.
   Read More

DESCIFRANDO TUS SUENOS

   Descifrando Tus Suenos

   Los sueños son poderosas herramientas que nos permiten procesar
   nuestros miedos, deseos, preocupaciones y dilemas vitales. Descifrar el
   significado de los sueños es muy importante, pero hay un paso adicional
   que solemos olvidar.
   Read More

METAPHYSICAL MILKSHAKE - WHAT ARE DREAMS

   Rainn and Reza sit down with psychologist and author Ian Wallace to
   ponder, "What are Dreams?"

   'Absolutely loved this podcast! As an avid lover of dreamwork, this was
   really insightful and fun!'

   'Wow! The dream interpretation is amazing.'
   Read More

DREAMS: THE ULTIMATE SELF-PORTRAIT WITH NICK VIALL

   On the Viall Files we are decoding your dreams with dream psychologist,
   Ian Wallace. Ian is a best-selling author and popular broadcaster who
   is widely acclaimed in the media for his live dream analysis.
   Read More

RYAN SEACREST ON AIR, SISANIE'S PREGNANCY DREAMS

   Sisanie shared on-air this week she's been having vivid pregnancy
   dreams about her ex-boyfriends and even her husband cheating! She
   shared these crazy dreams only happen when she's pregnant. So what does
   it all mean?
   Read More

WHY DO WE DREAM? SCARLETT MOFFATT DREAMS

   Why are we naked in our dreams? Has Scott ever dream cheated on
   Scarlett? Scarlett calls in the help of leading psychologist and dream
   expert Ian Wallace to get to the truth behind her bizarre dreams... but
   why doesn't Scott dream at all?
   Read More

JOE MEDIA, WHAT OUR DREAMS REALLY MEAN

   Do you have recurring dreams that your teeth are crumbling, or that you
   are falling? We got top psychologist and expert on dreams Ian Wallace
   to break down some of the most-reported recurring dreams, and explain
   what they mean.
   Read More

JIM JEFFERIES, I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THAT, DREAMS

   In this episode, the team discusses dreams with psychologist, media
   dream expert, and best-selling author of "The Top 100 Dreams" and "The
   Complete A-Z Dictionary of Dreams", Ian Wallace.
   Read More

GREG JAMES, THE DREAM APPRENTICE

   Greg, Jimmy and Felix are joined by psychologist and dream expert Ian
   Wallace to help decipher Joe Root’s ’Tailenders / Tenacious D /
   Spaghetti Guitar / Jimmy 600 Tribute’ dream.
   Read More

CULTURESHIFT, DETROIT, 10-07-2020

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on WDET arts programme
   CultureShift in Detroit with Ryan Patrick Hooper and Amanda LeClaire.
   Read More

THIS MORNING, LOCKDOWN DREAMS, 13-05-2020

   We might be physically separated from our loved ones, but one thing
   uniting us are bizarre and vivid dreams in lockdown. After Holly had
   her own ‘quarandream’ last week, we’re joined by psychologist Ian
   Wallace to explain the phenomenon.
   Read More

GEMMA COLLINS, DREAM MACHINE

   This week Gemma chats to the fabulous dream expert and leading
   psychologist Ian Wallace to see if her dreams have meanings behind
   them. She finds out what her recurring dream means and also wonders how
   our dreams connect us all.
   Read More

DREAM SURGERY, BBC RADIO SCOTLAND, 24-01-2020

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Scotland in
   Glasgow with Stephen Jardine.
   Read More

LITTLE NIGHTMARES 2, MEDIA INTERVIEWS

   Dream expert and leading psychologist Ian Wallace was speaking to us to
   mark the release of Little Nightmares II.
   Read More

DREAM SURGERY, BBC RADIO SCOTLAND, 29-12-2019

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Scotland in
   Glasgow with Calum Macdonald.
   Read More

RENE DESCARTES DREAM, 400TH ANNIVERSARY LECTURE, BRASENOSE COLLEGE, OXFORD,
11-11-2019

   Rene Descartes Dream 400th Anniversary Lecture, Brasenose College,
   Oxford, 11-11-2019

   During the night of 10/11 November 1619, Rene Descartes experienced a
   dream that led him to make his famous observation 'I think, therefore I
   am'. Four hundred years later, this lecture at Oxford Brasenose College
   is a celebration of how most of what we know about human psychology has
   emerged from the study of dreams.
   View Lecture Slides

DREAM SURGERY, BBC RADIO SCOTLAND, 01-11-2019

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Scotland in
   Glasgow with Stephen Jardine.
   Read More

Lucid dreaming: how to teach yourself

   Lucid dreaming: how to teach yourself

   “Part of the excitement of lucid dreaming is the realisation that you
   have the power to do anything you wish in the world in your dream,”
   says Ian Wallace, a psychologist, dream expert, and author of The
   Complete A to Z Dictionary of Dreams. “By using lucid dreams to work
   through challenging situations in your waking life, you naturally begin
   to realise you also have the power to create the day-to-day reality you
   want to live in.”
   Read More

DREAM SURGERY, BBC RADIO SCOTLAND, 20-09-2019

   Analysing listeners' dreams live on air on BBC Radio Scotland in
   Glasgow with Stephen Jardine.
   Read More

The five most common types of dreams

   the five most common types of dreams

   Femail spoke to psychologist and dream expert Dr Ian Wallace about what
   your reoccurring dreams mean, following reports that 50 per cent of
   Brits are losing 9 hours of sleep a week Reassuringly, no matter how
   terrifying a middle-of-the-night pursuit might seem, it could actually
   be a good sign, as it can signify striving for your goals. Femail asked
   Dr Wallace to explain just what those reoccurring dreams mean and how,
   even with technology constantly around us, you can still get a better
   night’s rest.
   Read More

THIS MORNING, THE SECRETS OF DREAMING, 17-08-18

   Dream expert Ian Wallace explains why we dream, shares a technique for
   remembering your dreams, and says everyone can learn to lucid dream.
   Read More

Sleepless Nights

   Sleepless Nights

   Here’s how many hours of sleep you lose every week worrying about work
   Hard-working Brits are losing a huge amount of sleep each week due to
   worries about work, a survey has revealed Knackered, stressed-out and
   weary Brits are losing a huge amount of sleep every week due to
   worrying about work. Hard-working and conscientious employed Brits fall
   way short of the usual eight hours of kip a night, according to the
   latest survey.
   Read More

The Dream Job

   The Dream Job<

   British workers are losing more than nine hours of sleep a week due to
   worries about work The survey of 2,000 workers found that workers in
   the UK lost more than nine hours of sleep every week, due to worries
   about their job. It found that the average of amount of sleep lost each
   week stressing over work was just under nine hours 30 minutes.
   Read More

YMS LONDON, MARCH 2018

   YMS LONDON<

   Ian's talk on how to use dreams in marketing to develop your personal
   brand awareness at the Youth Marketing Strategy Conference, London.
   Read More

Decoding our work dreams

   Decoding our work dreams

   Most of our accumulated emotional tension is generated from
   encountering conflicts and challenges at work, particularly with
   colleagues. So, it’s natural that our jobs count for a lot of our dream
   activity. However, the work environments and colleagues we create in
   our dreams are not those actual places and people, but rather symbols
   of personal realisation and development.
   Read More

DREAM CRUISES, DREAM LECTURES, MARCH 2018

   Dream Cruises, Zodiac Theatre, Ian Wallace Dreams Lectures

   Dream lectures on the luxury cruise liner, Genting Dream, while
   navigating the Andaman Sea.
   Read More

What your dreams are trying to tell you and what to do about them

   What your dreams are trying to tell you and what to do about them

   The prominent dream psychologist says staying within the dream, facing
   your fear and taking control of events can be beneficial to your
   well-being. He believes the images conjured in the mind during slumber
   are linked to someone’s abilities and needs in the real world; you just
   need to look closely and read into the symbols encoded within.
   According to Wallace’s technique, dreams are a powerful reflective tool
   that can act as a compass pointing towards needs the dreamer didn’t
   even know they had.
   Read More

DREAM CRUISES, DREAM LECTURES, JANUARY 2018

   Dream Cruises, Zodiac Theatre, Ian Wallace Dreams Lectures

   Dream lectures on the luxury cruise liner, World Dream, while
   navigating the South China Sea.
   Read More

Algengustu draumarnir og hvað þeir þýða

   Algengustu draumarnir og hvað þeir þýða

   Draumar geta veitt okkur furðulega innsýn í undirmeðvitundina og
   reynist oft erfitt að ráða þá. Á vef Doktor.is stendur eftirfarandi um
   drauma:
   Read More

FALLING DREAMS, BBC RADIO 4

   With the backdrop of an eerie descent into falling dreams - created
   from electronic sound and recorded testimonies by BBC Radiophonic
   Workshop pioneer, Delia Derbyshire - Ian meets depth psychologist and
   dream expert Ian Wallace, who reveals what falling dreams could mean
   and why they are among the most common we experience.
   Read More

What do YOUR dreams mean?

   What do YOUR dreams mean?

   Ruth Langsford has confessed she is a sufferer of the third most common
   dream – using a toilet in public. On Monday’s episode of This Morning,
   Ruth and Eamonn Holmes hosted a phone-in where viewers had their dreams
   analysed by dream expert Ian Wallace.
   Read More

THIS MORNING, 21-08-2017

   In this next dream feature on ITV’s This Morning, I am joined again by
   the lovely Ruth and charming Eamonn as we explore some of the dreams of
   our wonderful viewers. This time, our dream explorations include dreams
   about the emotional containment and confinement of swimming pools,
   dreams about moving house, more house dreams but this time with extra
   rooms and strangers living in them, dreams about teeth, dreams about
   toilets, dreams about hairballs stuck in the dreamer’s throat, and
   dreams about being stuck on the stairs.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 08-08-2017

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Janey and I make sense of some more of your wonderful dreams.
   The dreams we explored in the show included…
   Read More

A Psychologist’s Dream Interpretation Of Common Dreams

   A Psychologist’s Dream Interpretation Of Common Dreams

   We all have dreams every night. Yes, although sometimes it seems like
   you don’t have one. But the reality is you have. Some dreams are
   forgotten when you wake up and some are clear. Well, there is another
   explanation for that which is not the subject of this post. While
   dreams are a common phenomenon to all people across cultures, it is
   also one of the most mysterious human experiences. It produces more
   questions than answers. For instance, you might ask why do we dream?
   Or, what do dreams mean?
   Read More

THIS MORNING, 18-07-2017

   In this dream feature on ITV’s This Morning, I am joined by the lovely
   Ruth and charming Eamonn as we explore some of the dreams of our
   wonderful viewers. Our dream explorations include dreams about having a
   mouthful of sand, dreams about houses crumbling down, dreams about
   being lost, and dreams about jolting and jerking. The dream which
   caused most intrigue and received most attention was about chickens
   dressed in soldier uniforms trying to shoot the dreamer from an
   upstairs window. Our analysis of this dream created a lot of interest
   from a variety of commentators and was heavily featured in the next
   day’s newspapers!
   Read More

RUSSELL BRAND, RADIO X

   Russell invited me onto his Radio X show to explore some of the reasons
   around why we dream and what our dreams mean. We were having a great
   conversation, which the listeners were really enjoying, until Russell
   started to feel a bit threatened when I offered some well-researched
   and contemporary alternative perspectives to his cliched and
   out-of-date opinions about dreams.
   Read More

Die 10 häufigsten Träume der Menschen und was sie bedeuten

   Die 10 häufigsten Träume der Menschen und was sie bedeuten

   Ian Wallace kennt sich mit Träumen und ihrer Bedeutung aus. Seit
   immerhin 3 Jahrzehnten widmet sich der amerikanische Psychologe in
   seiner Arbeit ganz der Traumforschung und hat bis dato bereits mehr
   als 150 000 Träume verschiedener Menschen analysiert. Wer, wenn nicht
   er, sollte also besser darüber Bescheid wissen, was im Schlaf so in uns
   vor geht?
   Read More

THIS MORNING, 25-05-2017

   Analysing more amazing dreams from our wonderful viewers on ITV’s This
   Morning with the lovely Holly and fabulous Rylan, where I helped
   callers, emailers and texters to identify why they had actually created
   a particular dream, so that they could make some powerful choices and
   take decisive action.
   Read More

DREAM ANSWERS WITH ANNA ASSEN

   1. What would you say about dreams in general? 2. How/why did you get
   into this business? 3. What are your thoughts on the Freud theory? Do
   you think it is the most known theory to interpret dreams? 4. Do you
   have a set of rules/instructions you follow to interpret people’s
   dreams? 5. Do you know about some of the most recent studies about
   interpreting dreams? If so which ones? 6. What is one dream you
   interpreted that left an impression on you? (Good or bad) 7. What are
   you thoughts about why we dream and if dreaming has something to do
   with reality?
   Read More

Que Signifient Vos Rêves Erotiques?

   Que Signifient Vos Rêves Erotiques?

   Le psychologue Ian Wallace a interprété les rêves érotiques les plus
   communs relayés par la presse britannique . L’expert a analysé
   la signification des rêves érotiques parmi les plus courants.   Les
   rêves sexuels les plus communs comprennent le sexe avec un patron, un
   ex, un ami ou un collègue, un patron, un partenaire de même sexe, avec
   une célébrité, un étranger etc…A noter que selon un rapport de l’Insee,
   70 % de femmes avouent faire des rêves érotiques, pour 80 % des hommes.
   Ils se manifestent lors de l’adolescence.
   Read More

What your dreams really mean

   What your dreams really mean

   Whether you’re flying, your teeth are falling out or you’re trying (but
   failing) to run away from a predator, most of us have dedicated plenty
   of time to trying to make sense of our dreams. Is our subconscious
   trying to tell us something? Is it our brains filing information away?
   Or is it a metaphor for something big happening in our lives? Ian
   Wallace, a globally prominent psychologist, told Coach dreams are
   actually a combination of all three – and it’s certainly not about
   mysticism or being psychic. “A dream is how you imagine yourself,” he
   explains. “It’s how you imagine the person you have been and how you
   imagine the person you would like to become.”
   Read More

Psychologist Reveals The 9 Most Common Dreams And What They Mean

   Psychologist Reveals The 9 Most Common Dreams And What They Mean

   Many psychologists have given up trying to interpret dreams, but we
   talked to one who hasn’t. Psychologist Ian Wallace has interpreted over
   350,000 dreams during more than 30 years of practice. He helped us
   compile a list of nine of the most common dreams, their meanings, and
   what action you should take in waking life.
   Read More

8 bizarre pregnancy dreams and what they really mean

   8 bizarre pregnancy dreams and what they really mean

   During pregnancy, it’s common to have vivid, strange dreams and
   frightening nightmares that wake you up in a cold sweat. Although
   pregnant women don’t have more dreams than those who are not, they do
   report more nightmares, according to a study in the journal Sleep
   Medicine.
   Read More

A tanglei mang kong hi Psychologist minthang Ian Wallace

   A tanglei mang kong hi Psychologist minthang Ian Wallace

   A tanglei mang kong hi Psychologist minthang Ian Wallace nih mang
   150,000 kha kum 30 chung hneksaknak a tuah hnu ah a langhtermi a si.
   Read More

DREAMS AND DELIRIUM, INTENSIVE CARE SOCIETY TALK

   Dreams and Delirium are two states of consciousness that often don’t
   seem to make any sense. Even though a delirious person may seem to be
   talking nonsense, they are often trying to make meaningful
   communication. In this presentation I gave at the ‘Delirium In The ICU’
   day hosted by the Intensive Care Society, I described how using
   Cognitive Framing methods can be helpful in making sense of apparently
   nonsensical dream and delirium states. Here are the images and the
   audio from the presentation.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON,, 21-11-2016

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I make sense of some more of your wonderful dreams. The
   dreams we explored in the show included…
   Read More

WORKING WITH CHILDRENS DREAMS

   When working with children’s dreams, it’s clear to see that dreaming is
   a wonderful thing for a child to do. One of the fantastic things about
   dreams is the realization that the dream doesn’t happen to you, you
   actually happen to the dream and you create everything you experience
   in it. So what you do in your dream is you are creating a far better
   understanding of who you are, what you need, what you believe – it’s
   fantastic snapshot of who you are.  A dream is the ultimate selfie.
   Read More

LEARNING ABOUT DREAMS

   The wonderful Dave Erasmus recently invited me to collaborate with him
   in a YouTube video, exploring the purpose of sleeptalking and
   somniloquies, so here’s what we made. On listening to Matt’s night
   ramblings at first, they seem to be ridiculous, meaningless, and
   hilarious, just a man lying in bed, unconsciously muttering to himself.
   If Matt was fully awake when expressing himself in this way, it would
   be termed a word salad, an attempt to communicate an idea that just
   emerges in a confused jumble of seemingly random words and phonemes.
   Read More

WORLD DREAM DAY, LOIS' DREAM

   We partnered with dream psychologist Ian Wallace to analyze the dreams
   of a few lucky fans in celebration of #WorldDreamDay​.
   Read More

WORLD DREAM DAY, NANCY'S DREAM

   We partnered with dream psychologist Ian Wallace to analyze the dreams
   of a few lucky fans in celebration of #WorldDreamDay​.
   Read More

WORLD DREAM DAY, SHEILA'S DREAM

   We partnered with dream psychologist Ian Wallace to analyze the dreams
   of a few lucky fans in celebration of #WorldDreamDay​.
   Read More

WORLD DREAM DAY, TAMMY'S DREAM

   We partnered with dream psychologist Ian Wallace to analyze the dreams
   of a few lucky fans in celebration of #WorldDreamDay​.
   Read More

WORLD DREAM DAY, WENDY'S DREAM

   We partnered with dream psychologist Ian Wallace to analyze the dreams
   of a few lucky fans in celebration of #WorldDreamDay​.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 20-05-2016

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I share the real meanings of some more of your brilliant
   dreams. The dreams we explored in the show included…
   Read More

Can our dreams offer insights into our health?

   Can our dreams offer insights into our health?

   It’s easy to resent our dreams; the troubling, the inappropriate, the
   downright terrifying ones we have when we just want a restful night,
   but is it possible to gain any insight from them which can help with
   waking life? Psychologist and dream expert Ian Wallace believes so.
   He’s been fascinated by dreams ever since he was a small child and now
   helps clients use the imagery they create in their dreams to access
   opportunities in their lives.
   Read More

NETDOCTOR, 13-05-2016

   NETDOCTOR, 13-05-2016

   It’s easy to resent our dreams; the troubling, the inappropriate, the
   downright terrifying ones we have when we just want a restful night,
   but is it possible to gain any insight from them which can help with
   waking life? Psychologist and dream expert Ian Wallace believes so.
   He’s been fascinated by dreams ever since he was a small child and now
   helps clients use the imagery they create in their dreams to access
   opportunities in their lives.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 14-03-2016

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I help you to understand the real meanings of some more
   of your amazing dreams. The dreams we explored in the show included…
   Read More

Furcsát álmodtatok? Nézzétek meg a 9 leggyakoribb álom jelentését!

   Furcsát álmodtatok? Nézzétek meg a 9 leggyakoribb álom jelentését!

   Van, hogy napokkal később, de egy szóról, illatról, egy szellőről
   beugrik, hogy mit álmodtunk az egyik éjjel. Nekem ilyenkor mindig
   beindul az agyam, és eszembe szokott jutni a teljes sztori a
   tollasbálról. Sőt van, hogy tudom, ezt már nem először álmodtam.
   Merthogy visszatérő álmai szinte mindenkinek vannak, ezek jelentése
   pedig sok esetben homály. Bújjuk az álmoskönyveket, de őszintén
   megmondom, én azokban még nem találtam magyarázatot az álmaimra. Egy
   híres pszichológus, Ian Wallace 30 éves praxisa alatt több mint 150
   ezer álmot elemzett, így összeállított egy listát a
   leggyakoribb álmokról, azok jelentéséről, és hogy mit üzen az álom, mit
   érdemes tennünk az éber életben.
   Read More

BBC IWONDER, LUCID DREAMING

   Do I have the power to control my dreams? How do I recognize a lucid
   dream? We all have the power to dream. But the first step to
   experiencing a lucid dream is recognising that you are in fact
   dreaming. It’s not as easy as it sounds and not quite as simple as
   employing the traditional pinch. It may sound a little unusual, but
   just like when we are exploring any intriguing situation, we do this by
   looking out for clues. We can identify these clues that we can create
   in our dreams by being on the look-out for anything that appears
   strange or out of context. And to help us, we can use a powerful
   connection process to recognise them and work with them. We’ll start
   with actually identifying the clue.
   Read More

THIS MORNING, DREAM CLINIC, 30-10-2015

   Analysing more dreams from our wonderful viewers on ITV’s This Morning,
   where I helped callers, emailers and texters to identify why they had
   actually created a particular dream, so that they could make some
   powerful choices and take decisive action. I also revealed why Keith
   Lemon dreams of having werewolf arms and being inappropriately intimate
   with Fearne Cotton. Keith’s verdict on my analysis was ‘Wow that dream
   stuff with Ian Wallace was ace!’
   Read More

THIS MORNING, DREAM FACTS, 30-10-2015

   In this episode of Dream Facts on ITV’s This Morning, I dispel some
   myths and misconceptions about dreams with the charming Ben Shephard
   and the lovely Holly Willoughby. Holly was hugely relieved to realise
   that there is no such thing as a bad dream and she was also intrigued
   to find that she shares her most common recurring dream with her
   on-screen husband, Phillip Schofield.The recurring dream is shared by
   Holly and Phillip is the 16th most common dream and you can find out
   what it really means in my internationally-published best-selling book,
   ‘The Top 100 Dreams’.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 26-10-2015

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I help you to understand the real meanings of some more
   of your wonderful dreams. The dreams we explored in the show included…
   Read More

WOMAN MAGAZINE, IF YOU DREAM ABOUT…

   WOMAN MAGAZINE, IF YOU DREAM ABOUT…

   Have you ever had strange or vivdly real dreams and then woken up in
   the morning and wondered what they actually mean? We do all the time,
   so we asked psychologist and dream expert Ian Wallace to shed some
   light on what happens in the deepest, darkets depths of our minds, and
   what our most common dreams really mean…
   Read More

DEAN JACKSON, BBC RADIO, 16-10-2015

   In this Friday night dream feature on BBC Radio, presenter Dean Jackson
   and I explore some of our listeners’ dreams and suggest how they can
   positively and healthily put their dreams into action. The dreams I
   analysed include Kerry’s rocky seashore and approaching wave dream,
   Dave’s huge steel metal room dream and Jill’s cliff face and falling
   dream.
   Read More

DREAM MEANINGS, BBC RADIO WALES

   Analysing Welsh listeners’ dreams from further north on the Celtic
   fringe in BBC Pacific Quay, Glasgow. Dreams analysed include Beryl’s
   blood, skeletons and telephone box dream, and Scott’s power-sliding
   into a forest dream and then trying to take off in an aeroplane.
   Beryl’s dream suggests that she might need to speak up more and express
   her needs in waking life, rather than always looking after the needs of
   other people.
   Read More

ELERI SION, BBC RADIO WALES, 14-10-2015

   In this episode of the Eleri Sion Show on BBC Radio Wales, the lovely
   Eleri and I explore the dreams of her wonderful Welsh listeners. The
   dreams from this special hour-long episode include towers and roofs,
   being kidnapped by a gang, floods, blood and skeletons, sloths, nails,
   stock markets, power-sliding cars, swimming baths and changing rooms,
   forgetting where you parked your car, and visiting your old workplace.
   No crystal balls or superstitions were used in these analyses.
   Read More

RTL, IAN WALLACE, PSYCHOLOGUE AMERICAIN

   RTL, IAN WALLACE, PSYCHOLOGUE AMERICAIN

   Un psychologue livre l’interprétation des rêves les plus courants
   rencontrés au cours de sa carrière Ian Wallace, psychologue américain,
   a analysé 250.000 rêves en 30 ans de carrière. Il a sélectionné les
   plus courants et les a interprétés.
   Read More

THE DAILY EDITION, 15-07-2015

   In this episode, the team discusses dreams with psychologist, media
   dream expert, and best-selling author of "The Top 100 Dreams" and "The
   Complete A-Z Dictionary of Dreams", Ian Wallace.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 29-06-2015

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I explore some more of your fantastic dreams . These
   include running in slow motion, floating and flying, hiding in a cave,
   hunted and derelict houses, department store dreams and parties going
   wrong. Your dreams included…
   Read More

DREAM MEANINGS, BBC RADIO WALES, 24-06-2015

   Analysing dreams live from London on the Eleri Sion show for BBC Radio
   Wales. The first dream about a mountain ledge reflects a big step that
   the dreamer is considering in waking life. The second dream is about
   swallowing wedding and engagement rings and suggests a need to speak up
   so that the dreamer can create more committed professional
   relationships in waking life.
   Read More

ELERI SION, BBC WALES, 24-06-2015

   In an hour-long dream special on BBC Radio Wales, the charming Eleri
   Sion and I invite her lovely Welsh listeners to share their dreams with
   us. The dreams from this hour include spiritual dreams, dreams of
   death, and why there is no such thing as a bad dream.
   Read More

DEAN JACKSON, BBC RADIO, 05-06-2015

   In this BBC Radio Friday night dream feature, the charming Dean Jackson
   and I help his listeners to understand a bit more about the meanings of
   the dreams they have been creating. Although some of these dreams might
   seem quite scary and disturbing, they are full of positive and healthy
   insight. There is no such thing as a bad dream.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON 27-04-15

   In this dream episode, Steve, Tim and I explore some more of your
   fantastic dreams on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2. These
   include teeth, tornadoes, back garden crocodiles, faded navy blue
   jumpers and being lost in a big hotel. Your dreams included…
   Read More

ELERI SION, BBC RADIO WALES, 11-03-2015

   In this hour-long special on BBC Radio Wales, the lovely Eleri Sion and
   I join forces again to explore the dreams of Eleri’s wonderful Welsh
   listeners, including live calls and lots of informative insights.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 19-01-2015

   In this dream feature, Steve, Tim and I explore some more of your
   wonderful dreams on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2, .
   These include Dolly Parton singing in a Middlesborough working man’s
   club, too many light switches in the bathroom, being chased by foxes,
   and being lost in a big hotel.  your dreams included…
   Read More

TEXT SANTA, CHARITY TELETHON DREAMS

   Spending the night under a duvet with Phillip Schofield
   Read More

TEETH FALLING OUT DREAMS

   TEETH FALLING OUT DREAMS

   Hi Ian, my teeth keep falling out.
   Read More

SMOKING AND CORRIDOR DREAMS

   SMOKING AND CORRIDOR DREAMS

   Hi Ian, I keep dreaming I have started smoking again I’m dead annoyed
   at self and ask my mum get me some e cigs she is no longer with me also
   keep dreaming get lost in loads of corridors and can’t find way out x
   Read More

GOOD MORNING BRITAIN, THE TOP THREE DREAMS

   GOOD MORNING BRITAIN, THE TOP THREE DREAMS
   Read More

GOOD MORNING BRITAIN, 29-10-2014

   GOOD MORNING BRITAIN, 29-10-2014
   Read More

FUTURE FLIGHT DREAMS

   FUTURE FLIGHT DREAMS

   Hi Ian, floating or flying flat on my face. sometimes I’d see some
   family members & would be in familiar situations. sometimes I would be
   float/flying over where or near where I’ve been before. I used to think
   it was a sign cause , I would suffer some crisis or other & it’d take
   me quite a while to link it up with a recent flying dream. thing is I
   never knew what it meant at the time ( of each dream) it was almost
   claire-voyant.
   Read More

STEVE WRIGHT IN THE AFTERNOON, 27-10-14

   In this dream feature on Steve Wright In The Afternoon on BBC Radio 2,
   Steve, Tim and I explore some more of your fantastic dreams. These
   include puffins in a tin, a forgotten baby, flocks of birds, contact
   lenses, goldfish in distress and being a fox in a spaceship. Your
   dreams were…
   Read More

KEVIN FERNIHOUGH, BBC RADIO, 23-10-2014

   In this interview with the BBC’s Kevin Fernihough, we explore the real
   meaning of why his producer, Harriet, has been dreaming that Kevin is a
   James Bond type figure. Dreaming about people who you work with is the
   21st most common dream and usually indicates that the dreamer is
   becoming more aware of some of their own talents and is beginning to
   identify some valuable opportunities to use them.
   Read More

THIS MORNING, DREAM CLINIC, 22-10-2014

   A Dream Clinic with Phillip Schofield and Amanda Holden, where we use
   the Dream Connection Process to analyse the dreams of viewers so they
   can turn their dreams into action.
   Read More

MORE FROM IAN'S JOURNAL

   IAN'S MEDIA DREAM JOURNAL

You can find more information about dreams and dreaming in Ian's Media Dream
Journal

IAN'S DREAM GUIDES

   IAN'S DREAM GUIDES

Ian's Dream Guides are guided visualisations to help you develop your
potential as you dream, sleep and relax.

Dream Guides are only to be used in situations where you can be physically
still during the visualisation process.

You can find Ian's Dream Guides at Ian's Dream Guides

   © Ian Wallace Dreams. All Rights Reserved.
   media@ianwallacedreams.com
