   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KDWN8Z

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-K386MCB

   Science and technology

A dream study for father-daughter duo

   ASU professor teams up with his 9-year-old daughter to study lucid
   dreams
     __________________________________________________________________

   A portrait of a father and daughter smiling in his office with his
   daughter's drawings on the wall behind them

   ASU psychology Professor Michael Varnum and his 9-year-old daughter,
   Clara, pose for a portrait in his office on ASU's Tempe campus. The two
   worked together on publishing a study on lucid dreaming that was
   inspired by Clara's dreams. Photo by Charlie Leight/ASU News
   By Dolores Tropiano |
   October 02, 2025

   Many parents only dream of sharing their passion with their child. But
   one father recently had an opportunity to make that dream a reality.

   Michael Varnum, a psychology professor at Arizona State University, and
   his 9-year-old daughter, Clara Varnum, co-authored a scientific study
   that links personality traits and other individual differences to the
   frequency of lucid dreams.

   Lucid dreaming is the state of consciously realizing you are dreaming
   while still inside of the dream. The study offers insights into what
   makes some people more likely to have these unusual dream experiences.

   "There's not a whole lot of scientific work out there on lucid dreams,
   nor dreams more generally, compared to other topics that modern
   psychologists tend to study,” Varnum said. “Dreams are inherently
   fascinating to most of us, and lucid dreams especially. But we know
   very little about them. Clara and I realized we had some new questions
   we wanted to ask about them.”

   The study ran in “Dreaming,” a scientific journal published by the
   American Psychological Association.

Eye-opening findings

   Our fascination with dreams goes back to ancient times when
   philosophers such as Plato thought  they represented a challenging
   puzzle about the nature of reality. Neurologist Sigmund Freud
   believed they were windows into our deepest fears and desires.

   In psychological studies of dreams, called oneirology, researchers
   focus on how dreams relate to brain function, especially memory and
   mental health. Unlike dream interpretation, which looks for meaning,
   scientific dream research studies how dreaming works using measurable
   data.

   “We sought to explore the relationship of a wide range of individual
   differences and the propensity to experience lucid dreams,” wrote
   Varnum in the study. “We attempted to replicate prior associations with
   openness, nightmare frequency and how often people experience lucid
   dreams.”

   The researchers explored the link between lucid dream frequency and
   variables such as the need for cognition, vividness of waking visual
   imagery and scholastic aptitude.

   According to the duo's research, people who had a more open attitude
   along with a cognitive curiosity were more likely to have lucid dreams.

   “Big personality traits, people who are more open to new experiences
   and people who are more outgoing reported having more frequent lucid
   dreams,” Varnum said.

   The pair discovered that people who have the ability to create more
   vivid visual imagery in their minds when they are awake “also have more
   lucid dreams as well as more unusual dreams — dreams where the person
   visits the same fictitious place or has dream friends that don't exist
   in real life, that kind of stuff.”

   And they found that it is not always “sweet dreams” for lucid dreamers.

   “This is something that was observed in prior studies as well, that
   people who report more nightmares also have more lucid dreams,” Varnum
   said.

   That made sense for Clara, who gave a nod to all of those experiences.

   “People with openness are ... generally more trusting. I find that I'm
   quite trusting and … honest,” said Clara, who attended ASU's Child
   Study Lab in preschool and is currently enrolled at the Knox Gifted
   Academy. “And also, it's rare that I have a dream that I remember not
   being a nightmare. And they're very intense nightmares.”

   When it came to scholastic aptitude, they found that people with high
   grades on tests such as the SAT or ACT are actually less likely to
   experience lucid dreams. People who were considered “emotionally
   stable” were also less likely to experience lucid dreams. No gender
   factor was found in the study.

The dream team

   The idea for a lucid dream study sprung from an ordinary conversation
   between Varnum and his daughter while they were driving in the car
   — and it evolved from there.

   “We talk a lot about ideas,” Varnum said. “She has a scientist for a
   parent and that's something I love to do and something she finds
   interesting. We were talking about a dream she'd had — a lucid dream —
   and how we, and probably lots of other folks, have dreams where we
   sometimes become aware that we're asleep. And we were speculating a
   little bit about what's behind that and whether some people are more
   likely to have them than others.

   “And then she came to my lab every day with me, and I walked her
   through the whole process, from hypothesis to generation,” he said.

   Varnum sees this research as a steppingstone toward more scientific
   studies in this area. Dreams have always intrigued people, but lucid
   dreams have been gaining significant scientific attention in recent
   years.

   “I think it seems to be entering the zeitgeist more,” he said. “So it
   seems like — at least among part of the scientific community — that
   there is a greater interest as well.”

   He hopes his experience will also serve as encouragement or perhaps
   even a wake-up call for other scientists with children.

   “I hope this inspires other scientists to take their kids a little more
   seriously in their curiosity,” he said. “And just because you're 9
   years old doesn't mean you can't co-author a scientific paper. It
   doesn't mean you can't be part of pretty much every step of the
   process.

   “This is how we train future scientists, right? And even if we're not
   training future scientists, we're helping people to actually understand
   the process."

   Varnum was the lead for data curation on the study, responsible for
   formal analysis, investigation, methodology, project administration,
   writing, reviewing and editing. Clara served in a supporting role for
   investigation, methodology, writing, reviewing and editing.

   This is the fifth grader’s first academic publication, and she said
   that coauthoring the study helped her learn more about lucid dreams as
   they relate to her personal experience.

   “I never really thought about them as a thing that some people just
   don't really have,” she said.

   And though Clara says she aspires to become a fashion designer when she
   grows up, she also enjoyed the scientific process.

   “I'd really like to do this sort of thing in science again,” she said,
   “because I love science, and honestly, when you have a dad who's a
   scientist, it's kind of hard not to.”
   Faculty Tempe campus Parents Science and technology Department of
   Psychology Psychology Research The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
   Download article assets

More Science and technology


   A young woman wearing glasses, blue gloves and a white lab coat holds
   out a beaker full of liquid in a lab

Research expenditures ranking underscores ASU’s dramatic growth in
high-impact science

   Arizona State University has surpassed $1 billion in annual research
   funding for the first time, placing the university among the top 4% of
   research institutions nationwide, according to the latest…
   Read this story
   Science Research
   Ying-Cheng Lai and Zheng-Meng Zhai stand in front of a whiteboard with
   diagrams on it.

Programming to predict the unpredictable

   As the natural world rapidly changes, humanity relies on having
   reliable, accurate predictions of its behavior to minimize harmful
   impacts on society and the ecosystems that sustain it.Ecosystems of…
   Read this story
   Artificial intelligence Engineering Environment
   baby gelada monkey clinging to an adult gelada monkey

Findings on adenoviruses in baby gelada monkeys provide a window into our own
cold and flu season

   If you have young kids or spend time around day care centers, you know
   the drill: Someone gets a cold, and soon the whole group is sniffling
   and sneezing. Now imagine that same pattern playing out in…
   Read this story
   Biology Bioscience Undergraduate research Life Science

Pagination

     * Current page 1
     * Page 2
     * Page 3
     * Page 4
     *

Pagination

     * Current page 1
     * Page 2
     * Page 3
     * …
     * 4
     *

   Arizona State University.
   ASU News

   Contact ASU News

   Manage subscriptions
   ASU News
   Media Relations Science and Technology Arts, Humanities and Education
   Business and Entrepreneurship Health and Medicine Environment and
   Sustainability Law, Journalism and Politics Local, National and Global
   Affairs Sun Devil Community University News
   University
   Admissions Financial Aid President's Office About ASU ASU Home
   Emergency
   Events
   ASU Events Athletics
   Maps and Locations Jobs Directory Contact ASU My ASU Repeatedly ranked
   #1 on 30+ lists in the last 3 years
   Copyright and Trademark Accessibility Privacy Terms of Use Emergency
