   #RSS

   Skip to main content
   Scientific American
   (BUTTON)

   July 18, 2014

   10 min read
   Google Logo Add Us On GoogleAdd SciAm

   What Is Dreaming and What Does It Tell Us about Memory? [Excerpt]

   Dreams may play a role in memory incorporation and influence our
   long-term moods, physiology and creativity

   By Penelope A. Lewis

   Excerpted with permission fromThe Secret World of Sleep: The Surprising
   Science of the Mind at Rest, by Penelope A. Lewis. Available from
   Palgrave Macmillan Trade. Copyright © 2013. (Scientific American and
   Palgrave Macmillan are part of the Holtzbrinck Publishing Group.)

   You are terrified and running along a dark, narrow corridor. Something
   very evil and scary is chasing you, but you’re not sure why. Your fear
   is compounded by the fact that your feet won’t do what you want—it
   feels like they are moving through molasses. The pursuer is gaining,
   but when it finally catches you, the whole scene vanishes...and you
   wake up.

   Almost by definition, a dream is something you are aware of at some
   level. It may be fragmentary, disconnected, and illogical, but if you
   aren’t aware of it during sleep then it isn’t a dream. Many people will
   protest, “I never remember my dreams!,” but that is a different matter
   entirely. Failing to remember a dream later on when you’re awake
   doesn’t mean you weren’t aware of it when it occurred. It just means
   the experience was never really carved into your memory, has decayed in
   storage, or isn’t accessible for easy call back.
     __________________________________________________________________

On supporting science journalism

   If you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning
   journalism by subscribing. By purchasing a subscription you are helping
   to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and
   ideas shaping our world today.
     __________________________________________________________________

   We all intuitively know what a dream is, but you’ll be surprised to
   learn there’s no universally accepted definition of dreaming. One
   fairly safe catch-all is “all perceptions, thoughts, or emotions
   experienced during sleep.” Because this is very broad, there are also
   several different ways of rating, ranking, and scoring dreams. For
   example, one uses an eight-point rating system from 0 (no dream) to 7
   (“an extremely long sequence of 5 or more stages”).

   Physical Bases of Dreams
   But let me backtrack. One aim of neuroscience is to map the brain loci
   of thoughts and mental experiences. Everything we see, imagine, or
   think about is linked to neural responses somewhere in the brain.
   Dreams also have a home. Neural activity in the primary sensory areas
   of the neocortex produces the impression of sensory perception. This
   means that neurons firing in the primary visual cortex create the
   illusion of seeing things, neurons firing in the primary auditory area
   create the illusion of hearing things, and so forth. If that firing
   occurs at random, these perceptions can feel like crazy, randomly
   fragmented hallucinations. It is easy to imagine that the random
   imagery and sensations created in this way could be woven together to
   create a complex, multisensory hallucination which we might call a
   dream.

   ...

   Do Dreams Serve a Purpose?
   In contrast to an activation-synthesis model, which views dreams as
   epiphenomena—a simple by-product of neural processes in sleep—other
   scientists have suggested that dreams serve an important function. As
   usual in psychology, there are lots of different ideas about what this
   function could be. Sigmund Freud’s suggestion that dreams express
   forbidden desires is of course the most famous of these, but there are
   lots of other theories about what dreams might do, many with more
   empirical support than the Freudian view. For example, the threat
   simulation hypothesis suggests that dreams may provide a sort of
   virtual reality simulation in which we can rehearse threatening
   situations, even if we don’t remember the dreams. Presumably, this
   rehearsal would lead to better real-life responses, so the rehearsal is
   adaptive. Evidence supporting this comes from the large proportion of
   dreams which include a threatening situation (more than 70 percent in
   some studies) and the fact that this percentage is much higher than the
   incidence of threats in the dreamer’s actual daytime life. Furthermore,
   studies of children in two different areas of Palestine show that those
   who live in a more threatening environment also have a much higher
   incidence of threat in their dreams. Reactions to these threats are
   almost always relevant and sensible, so the rehearsal (if that’s what
   it is) clearly involves plausible solutions, again suggesting that they
   provide a kind of valid simulation of potential real-life scenarios.

   Another suggestion is that dreams influence the way you feel the next
   day, either in terms of mood or more basic bodily states. Forcing
   people to remember the nastier dreams from their REM sleep definitely
   puts them in a foul mood, and nightmares (defined as very negative
   dreams which can wake you up) may even lead to ongoing mood problems.
   On the other hand, there is also evidence that dreams could help to
   regulate long-term mood. For instance, a study of dreams in divorced
   women showed that those who dreamed about their ex-husbands more often
   were better adapted to the divorce. Amazingly enough, dreams also seem
   able to influence physiological state: One study showed that people who
   were deprived of water before they slept, but then drank in their
   dreams, felt less thirsty when they woke up.

   The content of dreams can be influenced in lots of different ways. For
   instance, recent work has shown that sleepers tend to initiate pleasant
   dreams if nice smells are wafted at them in REM sleep, and they have
   negative or unhappy dreams if stinky, unpleasant smells are sent their
   way. Some people can achieve lucid dreaming, in which they control the
   sequence of events in their dream, and evidence suggests that these
   techniques can be learned by intensive practice and training. All of
   this is highly tantalizing, of course, because (though it tells us
   nothing at all about the original evolved purpose of dreams) it
   suggests we might not only be able to set ourselves up for pleasant
   experiences while we sleep, but we might also eventually be able to use
   these techniques to treat mood disorders, phobias, and other
   psychological problems. We already know that hypnotic suggestion can
   cause people to incorporate snakes, spiders, or other things about
   which they have phobias into their dreams, and—when combined with more
   benign forms of these menacing objects—such incorporation helps to
   remove the phobia. Hypnotic suggestion can also make dreams more
   pleasant, and mental imagery practiced during the day can be used to
   modify (and often nullify) persistent nightmares.

   There is little evidence that people actually learn during their
   dreams. The fact that they can learn during sleep is a different
   matter, but dreams themselves don’t appear to be a good forum for
   imprinting new information into the hippocampus (after all, we don’t
   even remember our dreams most of the time). Studies of language
   learning illustrate this well. Although learning efficiency is
   predicted by an increase in the percentage of the night that is spent
   in REM, the dreams which are experienced during this extra REM don’t
   have much to do with language. If they relate to it at all they are
   most often about the frustration of not being able to understand
   something and not about the mechanics of how to construct or decode a
   sentence.

   Memories in Dreams
   What’s the most recent dream you can remember? Was anyone you know in
   it? Did it happen in a place you know well? Were you doing something
   familiar? Most dreams incorporate fragments of experiences from our
   waking lives. It’s common to dream about disconnected snippets like a
   particular person, place, or activity. But do dreams ever replay
   complete memories—for instance, the last time you saw your mother,
   including the place, activities, and people? Memories like this are
   called episodic because they represent whole episodes instead of just
   fragments; studies the secret world of sleep of dreaming show that
   these types of memories are sometimes replayed in sleep, but it is
   quite rare (around 2 percent of dreams contain such memories, according
   to one study). Most of our dreams just recombine fragments of waking
   life. These fragments are relatively familiar and reflect the interests
   and concerns of the dreamer. This means cyclists dream about cycling,
   teachers dream about teaching, and bankers dream about money.

   Some researchers have capitalized upon dream reports to gain insight
   into the process by which memories are immediately incorporated (i.e.,
   in the first night after they were initially experienced). Freud
   famously referred to this as “day-residues.” One study showed day
   residues appear in 65 to 70 percent of single dream reports. On the
   other hand, a more recently described phenomenon called the dream-lag
   effect refers to the extraordinary observation that, after its initial
   appearance as a day residue, the likelihood that a specific memory will
   be incorporated into dreams decreases steadily across the next few
   nights after the memory was formed, then increases again across the
   following few nights (Fig. 20).

   Thus, it is very common for memories to be incorporated into dreams on
   the first night after they were initially experienced (if I have a car
   crash today, I’m likely to dream about it tonight). The likelihood of
   such incorporation decreases gradually across the next few nights, with
   few memories incorporated into dreams three to five days after they
   occurred. Extraordinarily, however, the probability that a memory will
   be incorporated into a dream increases again on nights six and seven
   after it was initially experienced. What is going on here? Why are
   memories less likely to be incorporated into dreams three to five days
   after they originally occurred than six to seven days afterward? One
   possibility relates to the need for consolidation. Memories may be
   inaccessible at this stage because they are being processed in some way
   which takes them temporarily “offline.” Notably, this effect is only
   true for people who report vivid dreams, and it also appears to only be
   true of REM dreams. As with most research, the dream-lag effect raises
   more questions than it answers.

   [break]

   Why Do We Have Different Kinds of Dreams at Different Stages of the
   Night?
   Dreams aren’t all the same. Everyone is aware of the difference between
   good and bad dreams, but we don’t tend to notice that some dreams are
   more logical and structured while others are more bizarre. Some dreams
   are so highly realistic that it is difficult to convince ourselves they
   aren’t real, while others are fuzzy and indistinct. Some dreams are
   fragmented, jumping rapidly from one topic to another, while others
   move forward in a more coherent story. Recent analyses have suggested
   that these differences are far from random; instead they may be driven
   by the physiology of various brain states and the extent to which
   structures like the hippocampus and neocortex are in communication
   during different sleep stages.

   Dreams occur in all stages of sleep, but they seem to become
   increasingly fragmented as the night progresses. In general, they
   appear to be constructed out of a mishmash of prior experience. As
   mentioned above, dreams contain disconnected memory fragments: places
   we’ve been, faces we’ve seen, situations that are partly familiar.
   These fragments can either be pasted together in a semi-random mess or
   organized in a structured and realistic way. The dreams that occur in
   non-REM sleep tend to be shorter but more cohesive than REM dreams, and
   often they relate to things that just happened the day before. REM
   dreams that occur early in the night often also reflect recent waking
   experiences, but they are more fragmented than their non-REM
   counterparts. Conversely, REM dreams that occur late in the night are
   typically much more bizarre and disjointed.

   Simply thinking about where these memory fragments are coming from and
   how they are connected together may provide an explanation for the
   difference between early and late-night dreams. The various elements of
   an episode are thought to be stored in the neocortex, but they are not
   necessarily linked together to form a complete representation. For
   example, if your memory of having dinner last night involves memories
   about a specific place, specific sounds, specific actions, and maybe
   even memories about other people who were there, each of these bits of
   information is represented by a different area of the neocortex. Even
   though they combine together to make up a complete memory, these
   various neocortical areas may not be directly interlinked. Instead, the
   hippocampus keeps track of such connections and forms the appropriate
   linkages, at least while the memory is relatively fresh. However,
   communication between the neocortex and hippocampus is disrupted during
   sleep, so this process is also disrupted. During REM sleep, both the
   hippocampus and those parts of the neocortex which are involved in a
   current dream are strongly active—but they don’t appear to be in
   communication. Instead, responses in the neocortex occur independently,
   without hippocampal input, so they must relate to memory fragments
   rather than linked multisensory representations. Essentially, when
   memories which have been stored in the neocortex are accessed or
   activated during REM, they remain fragmentary instead of drawing in
   other aspects of the same memory to form a complete episodic replay.
   These fragments aren’t linked together in the way they might be if you
   thought of the same place while you were awake (or indeed in non-REM
   sleep). For instance, cortical representations of both someone who was
   present for your dinner last night and of the place where it was held
   may be triggered, but these will not necessarily be linked together,
   and they may not be linked to the idea of dinner or eating at all.
   Instead, seemingly unrelated characters and events may be activated in
   conjunction with the memory of this place. One possible driver for this
   is the stress hormone cortisol, which increases steadily across the
   night. High cortisol concentrations can block communication between the
   hippocampus and neocortex, and since concentrations are much higher
   early in the morning, this could provide a physiological reason for the
   disjointed properties of late-night (early morning) dreams.

   Irrespective of how it happens, it is clear that dreams not only replay
   memory fragments but also create brand-new, highly creative mixtures of
   memories and knowledge. This process has led to the creation of many
   works of literature, art, and science, such as Mary Shelley’s
   Frankenstein, the molecular formula of benzene, and the invention of
   the light bulb. An especially good demonstration of this somnolent
   creativity comes from a study of 35 professional musicians who not only
   heard more music in their dreams than your normal man-on-the-street but
   also reported that much of this (28 percent) was music they had never
   heard in waking life. They had created new music in their dreams!

   Although we don’t quite understand how dreams achieve this type of
   innovative recombination of material, it seems clear that the sleeping
   brain is somehow freed of constraints and can thus create whole
   sequences of free associations. This is not only useful for creativity,
   it is also thought to facilitate insight and problem solving. It may
   even be critical for the integration of newly acquired memories with
   more remote ones (see chapter 8). In fact, this facilitated lateral
   thinking could, in itself, be the true purpose of dreams. It is
   certainly valuable enough to have evolved through natural selection.

   More by Penelope A. Lewis

It’s Time to Stand Up for Science

   If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support.
   Scientific American has served as an advocate for science and industry
   for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that
   two-century history.

   I’ve been a Scientific American subscriber since I was 12 years old,
   and it helped shape the way I look at the world. SciAm always educates
   and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast, beautiful
   universe. I hope it does that for you, too.

   If you subscribe to Scientific American, you help ensure that our
   coverage is centered on meaningful research and discovery; that we have
   the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across the
   U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time
   when the value of science itself too often goes unrecognized.

   In return, you get essential news, captivating podcasts, brilliant
   infographics, can't-miss newsletters, must-watch videos, challenging
   games, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can even
   gift someone a subscription.

   There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show
   why science matters. I hope you’ll support us in that mission.

   Thank you,

   David M. Ewalt, Editor in Chief, Scientific American
   Subscribe

   Subscribe to Scientific American to learn and share the most exciting
   discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.
   Subscription PlansGive a Gift Subscription

     * Explore SciAm
     * Latest Issue
     * News
     * Opinion
     * Newsletters
     * Podcasts
     * Games
     * Travel

     * Company
     * About
     * Press Room
     * FAQs
     * Contact Us
     * Standards & Ethics
     * International Editions
     * Advertise

     * More
     * Accessibility
     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy Policy
     * US State Privacy Rights
     * Use of cookies/Do not sell my data
     * Return & Refund Policy

   Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has
   commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of
   them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American
   maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting
   developments in science to our readers.

   © 2025 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.
   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
