   #alternate alternate (href-lang-link) alternate (href-lang-link)
   alternate (href-lang-link) alternate (href-lang-link) alternate
   (href-lang-link)

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MC44X36

   Skip to main content

   Your All-Access Pass to Vogue
   DOWNLOAD NOW

   Vogue
   Menu

   FASHION
   RUNWAY
   SHOPPING
   BEAUTY
   CULTURE
   LIVING
   VOGUE BUSINESS
   TEEN VOGUE

   FASHION
   Celebrity StyleStreet StyleModelsDesignersTrendsSustainabilityAll
   Fashion
   RUNWAY
   SHOPPING
   BEAUTY
   Celebrity BeautyHairMakeupNailsWellnessSkinAll Beauty
   CULTURE
   OpinionTV & MoviesMusicArtsBooksNewsSportsAll Culture
   LIVING
   HomesTravelFoodPartiesRoyalsAll Living
   WEDDINGS
   Wedding InspirationPlanning & AdviceFor Wedding GuestsThe Bridal
   ShopAll Weddings
   VOGUE BUSINESS
   TechnologySustainabilityFashionRetailCompaniesBeautyEventsMember
   BenefitsExecutive Reports
   VIDEO
   PHOTOVOGUE
   MORE
   NEWSLETTERS
   PODCAST
   MAGAZINE
   PROJECTS
   VOGUE ARCHIVE
   TEEN VOGUE
   Search
   Sign In
   Contact Us
   About Vogue

   Sign In

   Wellness

18 Common Dream Interpretations and What They Actually Mean

   By Audrey Noble
   February 24, 2025
   Image may contain Face Head Person Photography Portrait Body Part and
   Neck
   Photographed by Théo de Gueltzl, Vogue, August 2021
   (BUTTON) Save this story
   (BUTTON) Save this story

   Dreams can feel stunningly real, leave us shaken, and surprise us with
   their surreal storylines. But do they actually mean anything? Sigmund
   Freud, the famed neurologist and founder of modern-day psychoanalysis,
   had a lot to say about how we might interpret the visual, emotional,
   and cognitive sensations we experience while asleep. He believed our
   dreams are actually the disguised representations of our unconscious
   desires, thoughts, wishes, and motivations. It's a theory is still very
   much alive today.

   “Throughout history, there has been both fascination and debate about
   what dreams are, what causes them, what they mean, and the benefit they
   may carry,” wellness astrologer and author of “The Complete Book of
   Dreams” Stephanie Gailing explains. “Since antiquity, they have
   maintained a very important role in cultures across the globe, revered
   for their visionary wisdom.”

   The act of trying to suss out the possible meaning of dreams can be
   traced as far back as the ancient Sumerian civilization, when many
   people used them as prophetic guides and to help them make important
   decisions. According to Gailing, it wasn't until the early 20th
   century—and the birth of modern psychology—that dreams were seen as a
   reflection of the subconscious. Nowadays, it's common to interpret
   dreams in order to better understand our overall well-being.

   Thea Gallagher, PsyD, clinical associate professor of psychiatry at NYU
   Langone Health, breaks down dreams, which typically occur in the rapid
   eye movement (REM) sleep stage where images or stories play out in our
   minds, into three types: a pleasant dream with an ideal outcome, one
   with a less preferred outcome (or oftentimes a bizarre one), and a
   nightmare. What these dreams mean is personal and can vary; it all
   depends on the dreamer.

   “Dreams can show us things that we are experiencing in waking life but
   are not acknowledged in our conscious minds,” explains Gailing. “Either
   because we don’t have space to process them or we don’t want to deal
   with certain feelings or thoughts.”

   Though the interpretation of dreams will be different for everyone,
   there are universal themes that pop up and are worth looking into if
   you're trying to figure out what you're own dreams might mean. Consider
   this your crash course in basic dream analysis—or, a handy little dream
   dictionary, just for you. Read on for 14 of the most common types of
   dreams and what they could mean for you.

Dreams of Being Pregnant

   Depending on what is going on in your life, being pregnant in a dream
   can mean totally different things. Gailing says it’s important to look
   at the details of your dream to help flesh out the overall meaning.
   You’ll also want to explore how you’re feeling after the dream; she
   says your emotional reaction can provide insights into what the dream
   might mean to you personally.

   “For example, if you have a dream about being pregnant, and you have
   been working hard on a creative project, the dream may relate to this
   period of creativity you are experiencing and how you feel about it,”
   she explains. “It’s always important to take the dream into context of
   what is happening in a person’s waking life.”

Dreams of Falling

   If you’re dreaming about being in a free fall, Gailing says it could
   mean that you feel out of control and don’t “have steady footing” in
   some aspect of your life. On the other end of that spectrum, however,
   she says that if you find yourself falling in a dream but then start
   flying, it could represent freedom and trusting the timing of your
   life.

Dreams of Being Chased

   Someone chasing you in your dreams is another sign that you might not
   feel in control. Gailing says it could signify a couple of different
   fears, such as concern that someone is out to get you or that you’re
   avoiding certain responsibilities.

Dreams of Flying

   Whether you’re dreaming of flying like a bird or cos-playing your
   favorite Marvel superhero, Gailing says that the vivid dream of flying
   symbolizes freedom and a need for adventure. However if the dream turns
   into you falling as you fly, it could also mean you feel ungrounded. So
   remember to try to pay attention to what’s going on in the dream and
   how you feel.

Dreams of Death

   An obvious reading, Gailing says, of dreaming about death is that it
   could signify your internal fear about dying. But here’s another way
   she says that you can look at it: it could just be giving you a sense
   that a chapter or situation in your life is coming to an end—and that
   doesn’t always have to be a bad thing.

Dreams of Your Teeth Falling Out

   One of the most common dreams people tend to have is one that involves
   teeth falling out. Gailing says that there are three main dream
   interpretations for this. First, it could signify some sort of rebirth
   and transformation, as you’re releasing something old and making space
   for something new. The other two are more introspective and could
   signify feeling some sort of loss of control or internal concerns about
   how you present in public.

Dreams of Being Late or Missing a Deadline

   These habits of tardiness showing up in your dreams usually shows some
   sort of worry you have internally. Gailing says that it could represent
   worrying about a lost opportunity or stress around your relationship
   with time. It could also show that you’re overwhelmed by being
   overcommitted with responsibilities.

Dreams of Being Naked in Public

   Have you recently fallen flat on your face while walking through a
   crowd? Or accidentally liked an old photo of an ex while on a social
   media (read: stalking) deep dive? If you’re not one to brush it off and
   keep it moving, those embarrassed feelings may manifest in dreamland as
   you sleep. If you find yourself dreaming about being naked in public,
   Gailing says it’s most likely connected to a recent embarrassing
   situation you’ve found yourself in.

Dreams of Infidelity

   The good news: dreaming of infidelity isn’t necessarily a sign from the
   universe that you’re with the wrong person or that you’re tapping into
   some psychic ability to predict the demise of your current
   relationship. The bad news: you might be dealing with trust issues in
   general and operating from a place of fear. Both Gallagher and Gailing
   say that if you’re not feeling secure or have been betrayed in the
   past, it’s normal to have those subconscious feelings of distrust creep
   up. Maybe you’re having this dream because a partner has cheated on you
   in the past or you’re scared something will ruin a beautiful current
   connection. Just remember, it’s important to ground yourself rather
   than lash out over this particular dream.

   “Relationships are one [thing] that can conjure up a lot of uncertainty
   because we don’t know…there’s so many things that could happen in a
   relationship,” says Gallagher. “I think if it’s really something that
   has no evidence based in the present, it’s about saying ‘I got to live
   my life’ and engage with this without knowing every possible outcome.”

Dreams of Phobias

   No one wants to see insects or any sort of creature they’re afraid of
   while they’re sleeping. So why is your unconscious mind doing you dirty
   in your dreams? Gailing says that if you’re dreaming of your phobias,
   you’re most likely afraid of not having control in some situation in
   your life. “[You’re] face to face with something that haunts or scares
   you,” she says.

   She adds that certain animals and what those animals are doing
   represent different types of fears. For example, a rat could reflect
   that you’re hiding or shunning something.

Dreams of Your Ex

   Don’t let the TikTok tarot cards fool you: a dream about your ex isn’t
   their way of manifesting you back into their lives. So before you undo
   all that healing by breaking the “no contact rule,” both Gailing and
   Thea want you to take a step back and evaluate your feelings
   surrounding that dream. “Were you thrilled, horrified, or puzzled that
   your ex starred in your dream? Also, what’s your relationship with your
   ex? Do you never want to see them again [or] do you pine for them? Do
   you regret or feel shame that you broke up? The context is super
   important here in understanding what the dream is revealing,” says
   Gailing.

   Once you process your feelings about the dream (and your ex), you can
   then determine whether or not you're harboring any unresolved emotions
   about the relationship. Gallagher says it’s normal to think about
   people in your past who you’ve had a significant relationship with, but
   it doesn’t always have to a deeper meaning about the specific person.
   “What do you want to do about [the dream]?” asks Gallagher. “Sometimes
   people struggle with ‘I regret that I broke up with this person’ or ‘I
   feel sadness that they cheated on me.’ [They also think], ‘I just feel
   like it was the wrong time, wrong place, and what could have been.’ I
   think processing those feelings is really important with our
   relationships.”

Dreams that Feel Like a Premonition

   Better known as precognitive dreams, Gailing says, “These are the ones
   in which you dream of an event that has yet to occur, only for it to
   happen later. Some people [believe] that they are able to foretell the
   future through their dreams while others don’t sense that their dreams
   are precognitive until after an event that they dreamed about occurs.”

   But not every dream is a precognitive dream and you shouldn’t live in
   fear thinking you’ve predicted your future every time you sleep.
   Instead, she says to just take note of times when your dreams come into
   fruition and  “Embrace the power of [your] intuition and ability to
   hone in on subtle perceptions of awareness,” she says. In other words,
   this is a great way to “further develop this skill.”

   Gallagher agrees and says to have fun with it. “It doesn’t have to be
   that serious or deep,” she says. “I think [it] could be something
   that’s kind of neat and fun. [It could] sometimes make us feel
   connected to a greater sense of our consciousness.”

Dreams of Seeing a Loved One Who Has Passed Away

   When Gallagher’s sister passed and visited her in a dream, Gallagher
   says she focused on the fact that it gave her a chance to create
   another memory with a person she misses dearly instead of trying to
   figure out whether her sister was sending her a message from the great
   beyond. This is something she encourages others to do as well.
   “Sometimes it's really nice to have that experience where you maybe
   connect with someone you've lost in a dream,” she says. “It was such a
   beautiful experience to have this kind of dream with my sister in it.”

   If you’re feeling anxious or stressed after being visited by a lost
   loved one in your dreams, Gallagher recommends working through those
   feelings with a trusted friend, family member, or therapist. It might
   prove to be a meaningful moment of reflection and insight. “Dreams
   reflect things in our lives that are very much connected to strong
   emotions; it's no surprise that sometimes those will show up in our
   dreams,” she says. “I think that can be a beautiful thing.”

Dreams of Your Losing Hair

   Gailing says that dreams of losing one’s hair may be linked to some
   sort of worry you might have. This will be dependent on what’s going on
   in your life, but some common meanings behind this include loss of
   control, worrying about aging, or worrying about your appearance.

Dreams of Fires

   Dreaming about fires has a wide range of meanings. One of the most
   common interpretations of this type of destruction, says Gailing, is
   that you’re in a situation where you have no power. It can also
   represent feelings of great passion or your anger towards something (or
   someone) in your life. On the flipside, it could mean some sort of
   purification and clearing away of the old.

Dreams of Drowning

   According to Gailing, water oftentimes symbolizes emotions of feeling
   overwhelmed or consumed with something. This could mean too much
   pressure from a situation, too much work, too much responsibility in
   something, etc. “Basically whatever in your waking life that you feel
   like you’re drowning in,” she says.

Dreams of Snakes

   Snakes in general, says Gailing, are associated with some sort of
   transformation and metamorphosis.She goes on to explain that if you
   dream about a snake, it may be because you’re in a powerful time of
   letting things go and shedding the things you’ve outgrown. While it
   sounds like a good thing, she says that it can be scary letting go of
   what you’ve known to invite the unknown.

   Other things that the snake might represent include a form of healing
   (she points out that the modern symbol associated with medicine
   features two snakes and that the symbol associated with the Greek
   father of medicine Asclepius is a staff with a snake circling around it
   ), passion, or a sign someone around you is being deceitful or
   untrustworthy.

Nightmares

   While not pleasant, nightmares can clue you in to any unresolved
   emotional conflicts that you might be carrying around. “[They] shine a
   light on what it is you are fearful of,” says Gailing. “They give us
   the opportunity to process unprocessed feelings.”

   For the most part, you don’t have to be too concerned with having a
   nightmare. But Gallagher says that if you’re having recurring dreams of
   a traumatic event that has happened to you, you should seek out
   professional help to work through it. “It’s a clinical symptom,” she
   explains. “[A recurring nightmare about a traumatic event] could be
   indicating that you have some ‘unfinished business’ that you have to
   process, which is really important in healing from PTSD.”

   If it’s a nightmare that you’re scared will come true, she says it’s
   normal to feel a bit uneasy. But she encourages you to speak with
   someone so that the fears don't affect how you live out your personal
   life.

   Both Gailing and Gallagher encourage those interested in interpreting
   their own dreams to keep a dream journal; this will help recall the
   dreams and make sense of what they might mean to you in the present
   moment. It might just prove to be emotionally helpful, as well. “A
   dream journal offers you a deeper level of understanding about yourself
   and/or the world around you,” explains Gailing. “Even if a dream is
   full of fancy or nothing more than a recounting of the day’s events…I
   think that opening up to our dreams can leave us in awe and inspire us
   to feel more awe at the complexity and mystery of life.”

What is the most common dream?

   Gailing says that she hasn’t come across a singular dream that most
   people experience. Instead, she says there are a series of most popular
   themes that have been found amongst people across all different
   cultures. Those include being chased, falling, arriving late, death,
   teeth falling out, flying, and being naked in public.

What does a recurring dream mean?

   It’s pretty common to have a recurring dream, says Gailing. This can
   mean a number of different things, such as a sign from our psyche that
   wants us to pay attention to a certain thing or an unresolved issue
   that calls for healing. This might also be a side effect of
   post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), where she says that recurring
   dreams may be the reliving of the traumatic experiences while one
   sleeps.

   When this happens, she recommends journaling about it, or seeing a
   therapist or dream interpreter to discuss it and see what meaning it
   has. The most important thing to do is to pay attention to it. “Often
   by giving it an audience, it will bring the unconscious inspiration to
   light and from there you can work things through on a conscious level,”
   she says. “If there is resolve, then the dream may not appear as
   frequently or may not even appear again (as its job may be complete).”

Why do people dream?

   The million dollar question that no one has a straightforward answer
   to. Gailing says there are many theories on why we dream, such as our
   subconscious taking the time to process the things we can’t while we’re
   conscious or just chalking it up to normal neurological processes that
   have no real meaning behind them. Many cultures also believe that our
   dreams are ways our spirits and ancestors communicate with us. But just
   as the meaning of our dreams is dependent on our experiences and
   feelings, why we dream in the first place might be a personal answer
   that only you can answer. At least for now.

   Audrey Noble is a contributing writer at Vogue, covering all things
   beauty and wellness. As someone who is admittedly chronically online,
   she loves to debunk the never-ending slew of TikTok skin trends (do not
   put beef tallow on your face) and bond with celebrities over astrology
   and their biggest beauty ... Read More
     *
     *

   Read More
     * How to Take Advantage of January’s New Moon and the Fresh Energy It
       Brings
       Living
       How to Take Advantage of January’s New Moon and the Fresh Energy It
       Brings
       By Katharina Fuchs
     * How to Make New Year’s Resolutions That Stick
       Beauty
       How to Make New Year’s Resolutions That Stick
       By Christina Pérez
     * A Beginner’s Guide to Crystal Healing&-Just in Time for 2026
       Living
       A Beginner’s Guide to Crystal Healing—Just in Time for 2026
       By Lisa Stardust
     * I Love My Tarot Reader&-But I Love My Therapist, Too
       Living
       I Love My Tarot Reader—But I Love My Therapist, Too
       By Lisa Stardust
     * How To Supercharge Your Digital Wellbeing In 2026
       Beauty
       How To Supercharge Your Digital Wellbeing In 2026
       By Ranyechi Udemezue
     * How to Start the Year With Less Cortisol
       Beauty
       How to Start the Year With Less Cortisol
       By Mónica Heras
     * How to End 2025 The Right Way, According to Numerology
       Beauty
       How to End 2025 The Right Way, According to Numerology
       By Marie Bladt
     * Can’t Sleep? Try the 3-2-1 Rule
       Beauty
       Can’t Sleep? Try the 3-2-1 Rule
       By Mélanie Nauche
     * Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce Have Never Argued. Is That Bad?
       Opinion
       Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce Have Never Argued. Is That Bad?
       By Emma Sandler
     * My New Year’s Resolution? To Bail Less
       Opinion
       My New Year’s Resolution? To Bail Less
       By Emma Specter
     * Everything I Learned About Dating in 2025
       Opinion
       Everything I Learned About Dating in 2025
       By Zing Tsjeng
     * I’ve Been on Over 50 Flights This Year&-Here’s My Ultimate Travel
       Recovery Toolkit
       Beauty
       I’ve Been on Over 50 Flights This Year—Here’s My Ultimate Travel
       Recovery Toolkit
       By Brianna Peters

   Vogue
   The latest fashion news, beauty coverage, celebrity style, fashion week
   updates, culture reviews, and videos on Vogue.com.
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

     * Newsletter
     * Manage Account
     * Verify Subscription
     * Contact us
     * FAQ
     * About Vogue
     * Careers
     * Projects
     * Vogue Archive
     * Forces of Fashion
     * Vogue College of Fashion

     * Fashion
     * Beauty
     * Culture
     * Living
     * Runway
     * Shopping
     * Magazine
     * Gift Guides
     * Best of Sale
     * Cyber Monday

     * User Agreement
     * Privacy Policy
     * Your California Privacy Rights
     * Accessibility Help
     * Masthead
     * Visual Stories
     * Site Map
     *

   © 2026 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Vogue may earn a portion of
   sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our
   Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may
   not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used,
   except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

   CN Fashion & Beauty

Select international site

   (BUTTON) United States
     * Adria
     * Arabia
     * Australia
     * Brasil
     * Britain
     * China
     * Czechoslovakia
     * España
     * France
     * Germany
     * Greece
     * Hong Kong
     * India
     * Italia
     * Japan
     * Korea
     * México
     * Nederland
     * Philippines
     * Polska
     * Portugal
     * Scandinavia
     * Singapore
     * Taiwan
     * Thailand
     * Türkiye
     * Ukraine
