   Jonathan C. Glance
   Mercer University
   Presented at NVSA Conference (Northeast Victorian Studies Association)
   29 April, 2001

         Revelation, Nonsense or Dyspepsia: Victorian Dream Theories

   Upon reading a dream episode in a novel by Dickens, or the Brontes, or
   Wilkie Collins, we might pause and ask, What did the Victorians
   consider dreams to be? This simple question leads to others: are
   literary dreams the same as real dreams? should we interpret them as
   such? perhaps even, what do we believe dreams to be? If we distinguish
   real dreams from those in novels—that is, in conventionalized,
   artificial forms—then the interpretation of these literary dreams
   presents certain problems for the cautious critic. We assume a
   character's dreams contain some significance, of course. We can consult
   various psychoanalytic methodologies for interpretive guidelines, and
   these will often produce fascinating readings, yet we may experience a
   certain intellectual dissatisfaction with interpretations which must be
   so alien to what the author and original audience of a text might have
   imagined the dream to have meant. Warnings against the intentional
   fallacy notwithstanding, an author's apprehensions of what dreams are,
   how they may be used in literature, and how readers will respond to
   them clearly matter in the process of composing a dream episode. These
   considerations suggest a cultural and historical approach, rather than
   a psychanalytic one. Perhaps no better test case for this approach
   exists than in the works of Charles Dickens, so let us ask, What did
   Dickens believe dreams to be?

   Dickens composed a vast quantity of literary dreams throughout his
   career. They appear in his earliest writings—Sketches by Boz and The
   Pickwick Papers—and in his last, unfinished novel: The Mystery of Edwin
   Drood. In between, they proliferate in Dickens's novels (for example,
   in David Copperfield, Bleak House, Hard Times and Great Expectations),
   and create the essential structure for shorter prose fiction, like A
   Christmas Carol and The Chimes. Dickens depicts dreams and dreaming not
   only in his manifestly fictional works, but also in his ostensibly
   nonfictional ones: examples include "An Italian Dream" in Pictures From
   Italy, and "Night Walks" in The Uncommercial Traveler. Furthermore, he
   published numerous articles on dreams in his magazines Household Words
   and All the Year Round, and speaks of them in his letters.

   This wealth of material has received surprisingly little critical
   attention. Catherine Bernard has one of the most focused discussions of
   Dickens and Victorian theories of dreaming, published in 1981 in the
   collection Victorian Science and Victorian Values. She posits Dickens
   as a proto-Freudian, however, claiming for example that "Dickens
   anticipated Freud's idea of day residues and the distinction between
   latent and manifest content" and further that he "intuitively perceived
   the autobiographical origins of dreams" (205). Ronald R. Thomas
   continues the interweaving of Freud and Dickens in his discussions of
   Great Expectations and A Christmas Carol in Dream s of Authority: Freud
   and the Fictions of the Unconscious (1990).

   Such an approach is understandable. Sigmund Freud's The Interpretation
   of Dreams (published one hundred years ago) revolutionized the
   scientific study of dreams, and provided a framework for the
   interpretation of these phenomena. We are all familiar with Freud's
   model of the unconscious and with his theories of the underlying causes
   of dreams, and so our tendency may be to apply these notions to the
   dreams we find in novels written before 1900 as well as to those
   written after. By doing so we assume that authors such as Dickens
   somehow had a modern understanding of the unconscious and an
   intuitively Freudian notion of dreaming. We also assume that literary
   dreams operate in the same manner as actual dreams (Freud himself
   proposes this approach in "Delusions and Dreams in Jensen's Gradiva").
   These assumptions require careful scrutiny, however, if literary dreams
   are not real dreams (that is,artifacts of the unconscious), but
   consciously created imitations of them. This paper argues that literary
   dreams arise from a historical and cultural context, and reflect not
   just their author's insights into the human mind, but also contemporary
   theories about dreams (from both scientific and popular sources), as
   well as conventional literary representations of dreams and visions. To
   attribute to Dickens a modern understanding of the unconscious or an
   intuitively Freudian notion of dreaming is to wrench him from his
   historical context. To do so is also to ignore the complications of the
   textual evidence, for Dickens's own writings on dreams reveal complex
   assumptions about the causes and meanings of dreams. This complexity
   stems from the conflicting theories of dreaming in the Victorian
   period.

   In order to understand how Dickens used dreams, then, we must return to
   the question: What would he consider dreams to be? Dickens grew up
   under the dual influence of the Romantic movement's fascination with
   states of marginal consciousness, and neuroscience's new theories and
   advances in the study of the brain. The change in long accepted
   paradigms of the structure of the nervous system, and the
   well-publicized and revolutionary work in organology and phrenology of
   Franz Joseph Gall and Caspar Spurzheim, "all helped to focus the
   attention of the layman as well as the scientist on the nervous system
   and, in particular, on the brain" (Clarke and Jacyna 5). Roger Cooter
   notes, "Gall's doctrine beckoned into its orbit every one of the
   social, psychological, intellectual, political and religious concerns
   that had been aggravated and heightened by the conditions of rapid and
   pervasive social and economic change" (6). The operation of the
   sleeping mind became an important focal point for supporters and
   opponents of Gall, and this attention encouraged widespread speculation
   on the mysterious nature and meaning of dreams.

   That speculation manifested itself in two broad paradigms: the
   scientific and the spiritual. Perhaps the next step to answering our
   initial question, then, is to ask, "What would Dickens have been
   reading about dreams?" Scientific studies, or at least studies which
   assumed the prestige and authority (if not the pure methods) of
   science, proliferated in the early nineteenth century. But these
   studies coexisted in the book stalls and the magazines with works of
   oneirocriticism (or dream interpretation guides) and spiritual accounts
   of revelatory dreams.

   The foundation for most scientific studies of mental activity was
   associationism, which David Hartley popularized in his Observations on
   Man (1749). Hartley deduces three causes for dreams: the residue of
   daily impressions, the physical state of the dreamer's stomach and
   brain, and, most importantly, the associations of thoughts and images
   which always go on in the mind, but which are more vivid and less
   controlled during sleep. Most later scientific studies accept Hartley's
   associationist paradigm; a partial list of those published during
   Dicken's life includes William Newnham's Essays on Superstition (1830);
   John Abercrombie's Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers and the
   Investigation of Truth (1831); Walter C. Dendy's On the Phenomena of
   Dreams and Other Transient Illusions (1832); Robert Macnish's The
   Philosophy of Sleep (1834); Alexander Grant's The Literature and
   Curiosities of Dreams (1865); and William Hammond's Sleep and Its
   Derangements (1869). Although these works differ in terminology and
   emphasis, their similarities are striking. The authors, all physicians
   or surgeons, employ little scientific rigor to support their claims.
   More frequently, they rely on second-hand anecdotal evidence, classical
   sources (usually Pliny, Plutarch and Suetonius) or literature (often
   Sir Walter Scott's The Antiquary). We can follow the trail of one
   anecdote as a typical example: to illustrate how sensory impressions
   shape our dreams, Abercrombie describes how his friend, James Gregory,
   gave him a manuscript by his father, Dr. Gregory, which relates that
   the doctor had gone to bed with a hot water bottle at his feet, and had
   dreamed he was walking on Mt. Aetna (260). Abercrombie makes no
   apparent effort to check this story's veracity or to duplicate it.
   Macnish repeats the anecdote of Dr. Gregory's dream, and thirty-seven
   years later, Hammond continues its use in this fairly effaced form:
   "Instances are given of persons sleeping with bottles of hot water
   applied to their feet dreaming of walking on burning lava, or some
   other hot substance" (133). A scientific methodology to study whether
   the same stimulus will produce similar dreams did not appear until
   Alfred Maury's Le Sommeil et le Reves (1865), which pioneered the role
   of stimulation and suggestion in shaping dreams.

   Certain general assumptions about dreams recur in these scientific
   studies. One often repeated point is that dreams only occur in
   imperfect sleep. Newnham states, "There are no dreams in natural
   sleep—that is, in sound and quiet sleep—the body being healthy, and the
   mind at ease." Dreams occur only in a "morbid" state, when the brain is
   disordered by certain irritants, such as strong emotions, prolonged
   study, approaching sickness, dyspepsia or other states which impair
   sleeping (163). Macnish employs a phrenological model, stating that in
   "perfect sleep" all the brain's organs are at rest; but if one or more
   of the organs remain awake while the others sleep, dreaming results
   (43). The rationale seems to be that dreaming has to occur in an
   aberrant state of mind, because of the irrational nature of dreams.
   Another general feature of these studies is the analogy between
   dreaming and insanity. Abercrombie compares how in both dreaming and
   madness the mind acts without volition, and follows whatever "chain of
   thought" or associated images are present at the moment (256). Macnish
   calls a dream a "transient delirium," which resembles insanity in the
   absence of the mental faculty of judgement (45). All the studies assert
   that dreams originate in both previous mental associations and existing
   sensory impressions. Macnish speaks at greater length than the others
   on the effect of diet on the content of dreams. He contends that "a
   disordered state of the stomach and liver will often produce dreams,"
   and that as a general rule dyspepsia produces bad dreams (53). A final
   and crucial point of agreement in these various scientific studies is
   their denial of prophetic powers in dreams. Dendy states that although
   the notion of revelatory dreams is "entertained generally," we no
   longer live in "days of special inspiration"; therefore, he cannot
   rationally accept "the visions of slumbers as revelations or
   prognostics" (70). Macnish advances the same argument, and comments
   that the idea "is so singularly unphilosophical, that I would not have
   noticed it, were it not advocated even by persons of good sense and
   education" (102). This last remark is important, for it indicates that
   the scientific view of dreams had strong competition for popular
   acceptance.

   We find that competition in dream books and spiritual accounts of
   revelatory dreams. Dream books, inexpensive handbooks for the most
   general and least educated audiences, contain encyclopedic lists of
   objects or actions, and provide instructions on how to interpret any of
   them if they appear in the reader's dreams. These books invariably
   claim that an understanding of dreams will help the reader prosper, or
   will warn of coming trouble. Stemming in principle from the
   second-century dream book the Oneirocriticon (or The Interpretation of
   Dreams) of Artemidorus (first translated into English in 1643),
   nineteenth-century dream books are often anonymous works plagiarized
   heavily from previous dream books, sometimes only altering the title
   page in hopes of attracting new buyers. One such work I have examined
   is the anonymous, undated Nocturnal Revels: or, Universal Interpreter
   of Dreams and Visions. This text presents "the Nature, Causes, and Uses
   of various kinds of Dreams and Representations," and lists various
   objects and actions in dreams, with their meanings. Another widely read
   type of dream book, more spiritual and less pragmatic, catalogues
   narratives of revelatory dreams and other mysterious phenomena. Some of
   these works insist on a divine or supernatural origin for this
   capacity, while others claim it is a natural human power. For example,
   Mrs. Blair's Dreams and Dreaming (1843) contains narratives of
   premonitory dreams drawn from the Bible and contemporary accounts, and
   the author treats these dreams as divine revelations that God offers as
   moral directives. She asks, "Does it not savour of infidelity to say,
   that the Divine Being has neither the will nor the ability to instruct
   his creatures asleep as well as awake?" (114). Similarly, an anonymous
   article in the Baptist Magazine in 1828 asserts, "Insignificant as
   dreams in general are, there are doubtless two classes of agents that
   have access to our minds when sleep has impaired our own agency"—those
   classes are good angels (or "ministering spirits") and evil angels (who
   tempt the weak to wickedness) (qtd. in Grant 160-62). In contrast to
   such religious theories are those who assert a natural origin. Thomas
   De Quincey speaks in Suspiria de Profundis (1845) of "the machinery for
   dreaming planted in the human brain" as "a dreaming organ" analogous to
   other sensory organs (88), and "the one great tube through which man
   communicates with the shadowy" (88). Catherine Crowe's The Night Side
   of Nature (1850), provides many anecdotal examples of presentiments and
   prophetic dreams, and explains that "The soul, which is designed as the
   mirror of a superior spiritual order (to which it belongs), still
   receives, in dreams, some rays from above, and enjoys a foretaste of
   its future condition" (47). Yet Crowe asserts that "the faculty of
   presentiment [is] a natural one, though only imperfectly and
   capriciously developed" (47). Some few studies tried to link the
   spiritual and scientific theories. Joseph Haven, in Mental Philosophy:
   including the Intellect, Sensibilities, and Will (1857), tenatively
   asserts, "A dream may be prophetic, yet not supernatural. Some law, not
   fully known to us, may exist, by virtue of which the nervous system,
   when in a highly excited state, becomes susceptible of impressions not
   ordinarily received ... so as to become strangely cognizant of the
   coming future. Can anyone show that this is impossible? Is it more
   improbable than that the cases recorded are mere chance coincidences?"
   (qtd. in Grant 165).

   This survey of the competing discussions of dreams suggests the real
   diversity of theories and explanations which coexisted. The two broad
   streams of scientific and spiritual dream theories, each with
   subcurrents of disputes over method or essence, run parallel and in
   continual debate throughout the nineteenth century. These debates
   mirror Victorian cultural tensions and uncertainties; dreams become a
   focus for discussions of the nature of the mind and the soul, matter
   and spirit, science and religion. Most Victorians, immersed in this
   debate, aware of both channels of thought, considered dreams to be
   meaningless and meaningful, mere physiological artifacts and messages
   from the great beyond.

   Dickens was not only aware of but also keenly interested in this topic.
   George Henry Lewes reports that dreams were "a subject which always
   interested him, and on which he had stored many striking anecdotes"
   (72). Dickens owned several of the major studies of dreams, including
   ones by Macnish and Abercrombie (Bernard 202). Determining Dickens's
   actual view of dreams, however, is problematic, because his comments in
   letters and essays often appear at odds with his practice in the
   novels. Selecting representative examples from his letters, essays and
   novels, we can better see the diversity of his views.

   Outside of his fiction, Dickens tends on the whole to favor the
   scientific view over the supernatural. He parodies popular dreambooks
   in the essay "Dictionary Dreams," published in All the Year Round (31
   August, 1861), which sarcastically refutes the accuracy of The Ladies'
   Own Dreambook and ridicules popular oneirocriticism (549-552). For
   instance, the narrator of the essay reads that "To dream of cucumbers
   denotes recovery to the sick, and you will fall speedily in love; . . .
   also moderate success in trade." The narrator, a believer in modern
   associationist theories, sarcastically conjectures whether it would not
   be possible to cultivate such an auspicious dream by contemplating and
   then devouring an enormous cucumber before bedtime (551).

   Dickens also tends to explore the workings of the sleeping mind as
   Macnish and Abercrombie do, emphasizing the chaotic whirl of thoughts
   freed from the control of waking reason. In "Early Coaches," which
   appears in Sketches by Boz (1836), he depicts the fitful sleep of a man
   awaiting a predawn call to wake him for a business trip. In this
   passage he exhibits a classic scientific paradigm of dreams-caused by
   imperfect sleep, shaped by associated thoughts and external auditory
   sensations, and perceived half-incredulously by the half-conscious
   mind:
   You left strict orders, overnight, to be called at half-past four, and
   you have done nothing all night but doze for five minutes at a time,
   and start up suddenly from a terrific dream of a large church-clock
   with the small hand running round, with astonishing rapidity, to every
   figure on the dial-plate. At last, completely exhausted, you fall
   gradually into a refreshing sleep—your thoughts grow confused—the
   stage-coaches, which have been 'going off' before your eyes all night,
   become less and less distinct, until they go off altogether; one moment
   you are driving with all the skill and smartness of an experienced
   whip—the next...you are closely muffled up, inside, and have just
   recognised in the person of the guard an old schoolfellow, whose
   funeral, even in your dream, you remember to have attended eighteen
   years ago. At last you fall into a state of complete oblivion, from
   which you are aroused, as if into a new state of existence, by a
   singular illusion. You are apprenticed to a trunk-maker; how, or why,
   or when, or wherefore, you don't take the trouble to inquire; but there
   you are, pasting the lining in the lid of a portmanteau. Confound that
   other apprentice in the back shop, how he is hammering!—rap, rap, rap—
   what an industrious fellow he must be! you have heard him at work for
   half an hour past, and he has been hammering incessantly the whole
   time. Rap, rap, rap, again—he's talking now—what's that he said? Five
   o'clock! You make a violent exertion, and start up in bed.
   This passage seems well informed by scientific studies: the dreams
   occur only before and after the period of sound sleep (or "oblivion"),
   not during it; the perception of time is warped during the dream, so
   that a brief moment of dreaming seems to contain an immense span of
   time; and the mind creates a dream to explain the sounds perceived
   during sleep. The second-person narration of this dream emphasizes its
   familiarity; this is the sort of dream, Dickens suggests, that anyone
   would have under these conditions-even the reader.

   Dickens interpreted his own dreams from this scientific standpoint as
   well. In a letter to John Forster in September of 1844, he describes a
   vivid dream he had while in Italy with his family: the spirit of Mary
   Hogarth appears to him, veiled in blue like the Madonna but
   nevertheless recognizable. He pleads for a sign that the visit is real,
   asking for the comfort of her mother, and also for the answer to the
   question, "What is the True religion?" Dickens relates,
   As it paused without replying, I said—Good God, in such an agony of
   haste, lest it should go away!— 'You think, as I do, that the Form of
   religion does not so greatly matter, if we try to do good?—or,' I said,
   observing that it still hesitated, and was moved with the greatest
   compassion for me, 'perhaps the Roman Catholic is the best?'....'For
   you,' said the Spirit, full of such heavenly tenderness for me, that I
   felt as if my heart would break; 'for you, it is the best!' Then I
   awoke, with the tears running down my face. (4.196)

   This experience would seem to epitomize a revelatory vision: the spirit
   of a woman he idolized comes to him from the other world and answers
   one of the profound questions of his life. Yet rather than musing on
   any serious significance in the dream (or converting to Catholicism),
   Dickens instead explains it away. He speculates on "the fragments of
   reality...which helped to make it up," including a painful recurrence
   of rheumatism which upset his sleep, the near drowning of his son Fred
   the week before which directed his thoughts toward death, the presence
   in the room of an altar with a missing religious picture (which had
   caused Dickens to wonder what the face in the picture had looked like),
   and the nearby convent bells which had supplied the "thought, no doubt,
   of Roman Catholic services" (4.196). This letter suggests Dickens was
   not only familiar with the standard scientific explanations of dreams,
   but tended to accept them and apply them to his own dreams.

   Dreams were a recurring topic in his magazines, suggesting that the
   topic interested a general audience. Dickens' published the essays
   "Dreams" in Household Words (8 March 1851), and "A Physician's Dreams,"
   in two parts in All the Year Round (26 November and 3 December 1859).
   Both tend to reflect the accepted scientific explanations of the
   causes, types and meaning of dreams. The Household Words essayis more
   interesting because it provided Dickens with an opportunity to discuss
   his observations on the topic. In a letter he instructed Dr. Thomas
   Stone, the author, to revise the article, stating, "If I venture to say
   I think it may be made a little more original, and a little less
   recapitulative of the usual stories in the books, it is because I have
   read something on the subject, and have long observed it with the
   greatest attention and interest" (Letters 6:276). Dickens's views,
   while informed by scientific explanations and literary conventions of
   dreams, accept neither fully. In contrast to most scientific views of
   the day, Dickens opposes the idea that a residue of the day's events
   chiefly makes up our nightly dreams: "I would suggest that the
   influence of the day's occurrences, and of recent events, is by no
   means so great (generally speaking) as is usually supposed....When
   dreams can be directly traced to any incidents of recent occurrence, it
   appears to me that the incidents are usually of the most insignificant
   character-such as made no impression, of which we were conscious, at
   the time" (6.276-277). His own dreams, he states, are more often scenes
   from his youth, and he marvels that although he had been married
   fourteen years and had nine children, he never dreamed of them. He
   argues that his experience is more common than not, based on many
   conversations on the subject. He also asserts that there is "a
   remarkable sameness" in our dreams, which are not, as Stone supposed,
   "very various and different" (6.278). He adds,
   how many dreams are common to us all, from the Queen to the
   Costermonger! We all fall off that Tower-we all skim above the ground
   at a great pace and can't keep on it—...we all take unheard-of trouble
   to go to the Theatre and never get in—or to go to a Feast, which can't
   be eaten or drunk-or to read letters, or placards, or books, that no
   study will render legible—or to break some Thraldom or other, from
   which we can't escape—or we all confound the living with the dead, and
   all frequently have a knowledge or suspicion that we are doing it—we
   all astonish ourselves by telling ourselves, in a dialogue with
   ourselves, the most astonishing and terrific secrets—we all go to
   public places in our night dresses, and are horribly disconcerted, lest
   the company should discern it. (6.278-279)
   Stone's article makes use of Dickens' suggestions-even to the extent of
   paraphrasing and quoting his examples.

   Besides establishing Dickens' fascination with and expertise in the
   study of dreams, the letter also provides two interesting statements
   about his theory of dreams in literature. One suggests that dreams can
   contain a hidden but discernible meaning: "I should say the chances
   were a thousand to one against anybody's dreaming of the subject
   closely occupying the waking mind—except—and this I wish particularly
   to suggest to you—in a sort of allegorical manner" (276). He also
   discusses the use of dreams as a plot device: "The obvious convenience
   and effect of making the dreams of heroes and heroines bear on the
   great themes of a story as illustrated by their late experiences, seem
   to me to have led the Poets away from the truth, on this head-and to
   have established the conventional beliefs from which I differ" (277).
   He may have discounted the conventions, but he also found them too
   convenient and effective not to use in his own novels.

   There is a tension between what Dickens in his letters asserts real
   dreams are, and what he creates in his fiction to represent a dream.
   That tension between scientific and supernatural poles varies in
   different episodes from different novels. We might plot a line, with
   the fever dreams which arise as recognizable medical symptoms in Bleak
   House and Great Expectations on one end, and the overtly supernatural
   dream visions in A Christmas Carol and The Chimes on the other; in
   between we might place revelatory dreams which exist in a more or less
   psychologically believable milieu: Montague Tigg's nightmare in Martin
   Chuzzlewit, or Stephen Blackpool's vision in Hard Times. Such an
   organizing principle helps to suggest the variety of Dickens' literary
   dreams. Despite the useful metaphor of a line between two opposite
   points, though, even the scientifically explicable fever dreams contain
   true revelations, and even the supernatural visions are accompanied by
   rational dismissals within the text. Both paradigms coexist in the
   dream episode. Dickens takes pains to construct around his dream
   episodes a rational frame which explains it away as originating within
   the dreamer. In Martin Chuzzlewit, for instance, Montague Tigg has a
   nightmare of a door that he cannot keep closed, and of a dangerous man
   named J. His dream may be a result of his waking thoughts and restless
   mind (Tigg worries about the door in his room he cannot lock, and "his
   fears or evil conscience reproduced this door in all his dreams"
   (651)), or imperfect slumber (Tigg sleeps in a strange bed, during a
   thunderstorm), or dim awareness of external sensations (Tigg wakes to
   find Jonas Chuzzlewit "standing at his bedside watching him. And that
   very door wide open" (651)). Other common explanations are incipient
   illness (Esther Summerson's smallpox) or indigestion (as Scrooge
   exclaims to Marley's ghost, "You may be an undigested bit of beef, a
   blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato.
   There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!"(12)).
   The dream itself, however, follows the (conventionally literary)
   tradition that dreams are true revelations. Tigg's own ghost appears in
   the dream as "a man with a bloody smear upon his head" to reveal his
   fate: Jonas will kill him with a blow to the head five chapters later.

   The tension between a suspicion of and a faith in the revelatory power
   of dreams is, of course, quite ancient, but the ambivalence continues
   throughout the nineteenth century and directly shapes Dickens's
   discussion of and attitude toward dreams. Further exploration of how
   popular theories of dreams—which exist on the smudged boundaries of
   science, religion and folklore-influenced Dickens's creation of
   literary dreams would form an important contribution to the study of
   his works. In her essay "Against Tradition: The Case for a
   Particularized Historical Method," Marilyn Butler emphasizes that, "A
   genuinely historical perspective discourages dogmatism, by obliging us
   to foreground the differences between our circumstances, aims, and
   language, and those of the past" (44). Only by recognizing those
   differences, and the original contexts which produced Dickens's novels,
   can we hope to understand the meaning of the literary dreams, rather
   than project meaning upon them.

                                 Works Cited

   Abercrombie, John. Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers and the
   Investigation of Truth. 3rd ed. Edinburgh: Waugh and Innes, 1832.

   Bernard, Catherine A. "Dickens and Victorian Dream Theory." Victorian
   Science and Victorian Values: Literary Perspectives. Ed. James Paradis
   and Thomas Postlewait. New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1981.
   197-216.

   Blair, Mrs. Dreams and Dreaming. London: G. Groombridge, 1843.

   Clarke, Edwin, and L. S. Jacyna. Nineteenth Century Origins of
   Neuroscientific Concepts. Berkeley: U of California P, 1987.

   Crowe, Catherine. The Night Side of Nature. New York: Redfield, 1850.

   Dendy, Walter C. On the Phenomena of Dreams and Other Transient
   Illusions. London: Whittaker, Treacher and Co., 1832.

   De Quincey, Thomas. Confessions of an English Opium-Eater and Other
   Writings. Ed. Grevel Lindop. New York: Oxford UP, 1985.

   Dickens, Charles. Bleak House. Ed. George Ford and Sylvie Monod. Norton
   Critical ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 1977.

   ---.A Christmas Carol. Christmas Books. Ed. Ruth Glancy. World's
   Classics ed. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1988. 1090.

   ---. Dombey and Son. Ed. Alan Horsman. The Clarendon Dickens. Oxford:
   Clarendon, 1974.

   ---. Great Expectations. Ed. Angus Calder. New York: Penguin, 1965.

   ---. Hard Times. Ed. George Ford and Sylvie Monod. A Norton Critical
   ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 1966.

   ---. The Letters of Charles Dickens. Ed. Graham Storey, Kathleen
   Tillotson and Nina Burgis. 6 vols. The Pilgrim ed. Oxford: Clarendon,
   1988.

   ---. Martin Chuzzlewit. Ed. Margaret Cardwell. The Clarendon Dickens.
   Oxford: Clarendon, 1982.

   ---. Sketches by Boz. (15 October, 1999).

   ---. The Uncommercial Traveler. (18 Octeober, 1999).

   "Dictionary Dreams." All the Year Round 5.123 (31 Aug., 1861): 549-52.

   "Dreams." Household Words 2.50 (8 March, 1851): 566-72.

   Freud, Sigmund. "Delusions and Dreams in Jensen's Gradiva." The
   Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud.
   Ed. and trans. James Strachey. Vol. 9 of 24. London: Hogarth, 1959.
   7-93.

   ---. The Interpretation of Dreams. The Standard Edition of the Complete
   Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Ed. and trans. James Strachey.
   Vols. 4-5 of 24. London: Hogarth, 1959.

   Grant, Alexander Henley. The Literature and Curiosities of Dreams.
   London: Chapman and Hall, 1865.

   Hammond, William H. Sleep and Its Derangements. Facsimile of the 1873
   ed. Da Capo Reprint Series. New York: Da Capo, 1982.

   Hartley, David. Observations on Man: His Frame, His Duty, and His
   Expectations. 2 vols. Facsimile of the 1749 ed. Gainesville, Fla.:
   Scholars' Facsimiles and Reprints, 1966.

   Lewes, George Henry. "Dickens in Relation to Criticism." The Dickens
   Critics. Ed. George H. Ford and Lauriat Lane, Jr. Ithaca: Cornell UP,
   1961. 54-74.

   Macnish, Robert. The Philosophy of Sleep. 1st American ed. New York: D.
   Appleton, 1834.

   Newnham, W. Essay on Superstition: Being an Inquiry into the Effects of
   Physical Influence on the Mind, In the Production of Dreams, Visions,
   Ghosts, and Other Supernatural Appearances. London: J. Hatchard and
   Sons, 1830.

   Nocturnal Revels; or, Universal Interpreter of Dreams and Visions.
   London: Barker and Sons, [n.d.].

   "A Physician's Dreams." All the Year Round 2.31 (26 Nov., 1859):
   109-13; 2.32 (3 Dec. 1859): 135-40.

   Stoehr, Taylor. Dickens: The Dreamer's Stance. Ithaca: Cornell UP,
   1965.

   Thomas, Ronald Robert. Dreams of Authority: Freud and the Fictions of
   the Unconscious. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1990.

   Home Page | Academic Work |
