
   SEP home page
   Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
   (BUTTON) Menu
     * Browse
          + Table of Contents
          + What's New
          + Random Entry
          + Chronological
          + Archives
     * About
          + Editorial Information
          + About the SEP
          + Editorial Board
          + How to Cite the SEP
          + Special Characters
          + Advanced Tools
          + Contact
     * Support SEP
          + Support the SEP
          + PDFs for SEP Friends
          + Make a Donation
          + SEPIA for Libraries

   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Entry Navigation
     * Entry Contents
     * Bibliography
     * Academic Tools
     * Friends PDF Preview
     * Author and Citation Info
     * Back to Top

Dreams and Dreaming

   First published Thu Apr 9, 2015; substantive revision Wed Nov 27, 2019

   Dreams and dreaming have been discussed in diverse areas of philosophy
   ranging from epistemology to ethics, ontology, and more recently
   philosophy of mind and cognitive science. This entry provides an
   overview of major themes in the philosophy of sleep and dreaming, with
   a focus on Western analytic philosophy, and discusses relevant
   scientific findings.
     * 1. Dreams and epistemology
          + 1.1 Cartesian dream skepticism
          + 1.2 Earlier discussions of dream skepticism and why Descartes’
            version is special
          + 1.3 Dreaming and other skeptical scenarios
          + 1.4 Descartes’ solution to the dream problem and real-world
            dreams
     * 2. The ontology of dreams
          + 2.1 Are dreams experiences?
          + 2.2 Dreams as instantaneous memory insertions
          + 2.3 Empirical evidence on the question of dream experience
          + 2.4 Dreams and hallucinations
          + 2.5 Dreams and illusions
          + 2.6 Dreams as imaginative experiences
          + 2.7 Dreaming and waking mind wandering
          + 2.8 The problem of dream belief
     * 3. Dreaming and theories of consciousness
          + 3.1 Dreaming as a model system and test case for consciousness
            research
          + 3.2 Dreams, psychosis, and delusions
          + 3.3 Beyond dreams: Dreamless sleep experience and the concepts
            of sleep, waking, and consciousness
     * 4. Dreaming and the self
     * 5. Immorality and moral responsibility in dreams
     * 6. The meaning of dreams and the functions of dreaming
          + 6.1 The meaning of dreams
          + 6.2 The functions of dreaming
     * 7. Conclusions
     * Bibliography
     * Academic Tools
     * Other Internet Resources
     * Related Entries
     __________________________________________________________________

1. Dreams and epistemology

1.1 Cartesian dream skepticism

   Dream skepticism has traditionally been the most famous and widely
   discussed philosophical problem raised by dreaming (see Williams 1978;
   Stroud 1984). In the Meditations, Descartes uses dreams to motivate
   skepticism about sensory-based beliefs about the external world and his
   own bodily existence. He notes that sensory experience can also lead us
   astray in commonplace sensory illusions such as seeing things as too
   big or small. But he does not think such cases justify general doubts
   about the reliability of sensory perception: by taking a closer look at
   an object seen under suboptimal conditions, we can easily avoid
   deception. By contrast, dreams suggest that even in a seemingly
   best-case scenario of sensory perception (Stroud 1984), deception is
   possible. Even the realistic experience of sitting dressed by the fire
   and looking at a piece of paper in one’s hands (Descartes 1641: I.5) is
   something that can, and according to Descartes often does, occur in a
   dream.

   There are different ways of construing the dream argument. A strong
   reading is that Descartes is trapped in a lifelong dream and none of
   his experiences have ever been caused by external objects (the Always
   Dreaming Doubt; see Newman 2019). A weaker reading is that he is just
   sometimes dreaming but cannot rule out at any given moment that he is
   dreaming right now (the Now Dreaming Doubt; see Newman 2019). This is
   still epistemologically worrisome: even though some of his
   sensory-based beliefs might be true, he cannot determine which these
   are unless he can rule out that he is dreaming. Doubt is thus cast on
   all of his beliefs, making sensory-based knowledge slip out of reach.

   Cartesian-style skeptical arguments have the following form (quoted
   from Klein 2015):
    1. If I know that p, then there are no genuine grounds for doubting
       that p.
    2. U is a genuine ground for doubting that p.
    3. Therefore, I do not know that p.

   If we apply this to the case of dreaming, we get:
    1. If I know that I am sitting dressed by the fire, then there are no
       genuine grounds for doubting that I am really sitting dressed by
       the fire.
    2. If I were now dreaming, this would be a genuine ground for doubting
       that I am sitting dressed by the fire: in dreams, I have often had
       the realistic experience of sitting dressed by the fire when I was
       actually lying undressed in bed!
    3. Therefore, I do not know that I am now sitting dressed by the fire.

   Importantly, both strong and weak versions of the dream argument cast
   doubt only on sensory-based beliefs, but leave other beliefs unscathed.
   According to Descartes, that 2+3=5 or that a square has no more than 4
   sides is knowable even if he is now dreaming:

     although, in truth, I should be dreaming, the rule still holds that
     all which is clearly presented to my intellect is indisputably true.
     (Descartes 1641: V.15)

   By Descartes’ lights, dreams do not undermine our ability to engage in
   the project of pure, rational enquiry (Frankfurt 1970; but see
   Broughton 2002).

1.2 Earlier discussions of dream skepticism and why Descartes’ version is
special

   Dream arguments have been a staple of philosophical skepticism since
   antiquity and were so well known that in his objections to the
   Meditations, Hobbes (1641) criticized Descartes for not having come up
   with a more original argument. Yet, Descartes’ version of the problem,
   more than any other, has left its mark on the philosophical discussion.

   Earlier versions tended to touch upon dreams just briefly and discuss
   them alongside other examples of sensory deception. For example, in the
   Theaetetus (157e), Plato has Socrates discuss a defect in perception
   that is common to

     dreams and diseases, including insanity, and everything else that is
     said to cause illusions of sight and hearing and the other senses.

   This leads to the conclusion that knowledge cannot be defined through
   perception.

   Dreams also appear in the canon of standard skeptical arguments used by
   the Pyrrhonists. Again, dreams and sleep are just one of several
   conditions (including illness, joy, and sorrow) that cast doubt on the
   trusthworthiness of sensory perception (Diogenes Laertius, Lives of
   Eminent Philosophers; Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism).

   Augustine (Against the Academics; Confessions) thought the dream
   problem could be contained, arguing that in retrospect, we can
   distinguish both dreams and illusions from actual perception (Matthew
   2005: chapter 8). And Montaigne (The Apology for Raymond Sebond) noted
   that wakefulness itself teems with reveries and illusions, which he
   thought were even more epistemologically worrisome than nocturnal
   dreams.

   Descartes devoted much more space to the discussion of dreaming and
   cast it as a unique epistemological threat distinct from both waking
   illusions and evil genius or brain-in-a-vat-style arguments. His claim
   that he has often been deceived by his dreams implies he also saw
   dreaming as a real-world (rather than merely hypothetical) threat.

   This is further highlighted by the intimate, first-person style of the
   Meditations. Their narrator is supposed to exemplify everyone’s
   epistemic situation, illustrating the typical defects of the human
   mind. Readers are further drawn in by Descartes’ strategy of moving
   from commonsense examples towards more sophisticated philosophical
   claims (Frankfurt 1970). For example, Descartes builds up towards dream
   skepticism by first considering familiar cases of sensory illusions and
   then deceptively realistic dreams.

   Finally, much attention has been devoted to several dreams Descartes
   reportedly had as a young man. Some believe these dreams embodied
   theoretical doubts he developed in the Discourse and Meditations
   (Baillet 1691; Leibniz 1880: IV; Cole 1992; Keefer 1996). Hacking
   (2001:252) suggests that for Descartes, dream skepticism was not just a
   philosophical conundrum but a source of genuine doubt. There is also
   some discussion about the dream reports’ authenticity (Freud 1940; Cole
   1992; Clarke 2006; Browne 1977).

1.3 Dreaming and other skeptical scenarios

   In the Meditations, after discussing the dream argument, Descartes
   raises the possibility of an omnipotent evil genius determined to
   deceive us even in our most basic beliefs. Contrary to dream deception,
   Descartes emphasizes that the evil genius hypothesis is a mere fiction.
   Still, it radicalizes the dream doubt in two respects. One, where the
   dream argument left the knowability of certain general truths intact,
   these are cast in doubt by the evil genius hypothesis. Two, where the
   dream argument, at least on the weaker reading, involves just temporary
   deception, the evil genius has us permanently deceived.

   One modernized version, the brain-in-a-vat thought experiment, says
   that if evil scientists placed your brain in a vat and stimulated it
   just right, your conscious experience would be exactly the same as if
   you were still an ordinary, embodied human being (Putnam 1981). In the
   Matrix-trilogy (Chalmers 2005), Matrixers live unbeknownst to
   themselves in a computer simulation. Unlike the brain-in-a-vat, they
   have bodies that are kept alive in pods, and flaws in the simulation
   allow some of them to bend its rules to their advantage.

   Unlike dream deception, which is often cast as a regularly recurring
   actuality (cf. Windt 2011), brain-in-a-vat-style arguments are often
   thought to be merely logically or nomologically possible. However,
   there might be good reasons for thinking that we actually live in a
   computer simulation (Bostrom 2003), and if we lend some credence to
   radical skeptical scenarios, this may have consequences for how we act
   (Schwitzgebel 2017).

   Even purely hypothetical skeptical scenarios may enhance their
   psychological force by capitalizing on the analogy with dreams. Clark
   (2005) argues that the Matrix contains elements of “industrial-strength
   deception” in which both sensory experience and intellectual
   functioning are exactly the same as in standard wake-states, whereas
   other aspects are more similar to the compromised reasoning and bizarre
   shifts that are the hallmark of dreams.

1.4 Descartes’ solution to the dream problem and real-world dreams

   At the end of the Sixth Meditation, Descartes suggests a solution to
   the dream problem that is tied to a reassessment of what it is like to
   dream. Contrary to his remarks in the First Meditation, he notes that
   dreams are only rarely connected to waking memories and are often
   discontinuous, as when dream characters suddenly appear or disappear.
   He then introduces the coherence test:

     But when I perceive objects with regard to which I can distinctly
     determine both the place whence they come, and that in which they
     are, and the time at which they appear to me, and when, without
     interruption, I can connect the perception I have of them with the
     whole of the other parts of my life, I am perfectly sure that what I
     thus perceive occurs while I am awake and not during sleep.
     (Meditation VI. 24)

   For all practical purposes, he has now found a mark by which dreaming
   and waking can be distinguished (cf. Meditation I.7), and even if the
   coherence test is not fail-safe, the threat of dream deception has been
   averted.

   Descartes’ remarks about the discontinuous and ad hoc nature of many
   dreams are backed up by empirical work on dream bizarreness (see Hobson
   1988; Revonsuo & Salmivalli 1995). Still, many of his critics were not
   convinced this helped his case against the skeptic. Even if Descartes’
   revised phenomenological description characterizes most dreams, one
   might occasionally merely dream of successfully performing the test
   (Hobbes 1641), and in some dreams, one might seem to have a clear and
   distinct idea but this impression is false (Bourdin 1641). Both the
   coherence test and the criterion of clarity and distinctness would then
   be unreliable.

   How considerations of empirical plausibility impact the dream argument
   continues to be a matter of debate. Grundmann (2002) appeals to
   scientific dream research to introduce an introspective criterion: when
   we introspectively notice that we are able to engage in critical
   reflection, we have good reason to think that we are awake and not
   dreaming. However, this assumes critical reasoning to be uniformly
   absent in dreams. If attempts at critical reasoning do occur in dreams
   and if they generally tend to be corrupted, the introspective criterion
   might again be problematic (Windt 2011, 2015a). There are also cases in
   which even after awakening, people mistake what was in fact a dream for
   reality (Wamsley et al. 2014). At least in certain situations and for
   some people, dream deception might be a genuine cause of concern (Windt
   2015a).

2. The ontology of dreams

   In what follows, the term “conscious experience” is used as an umbrella
   term for the occurrence of sensations, thoughts, impressions, emotions
   etc. in dreams (cf. Dennett 1976). These are all phenomenal states:
   there is something it is like to be in these states for the subject of
   experience (cf. Nagel 1974). To ask about dream experience is to ask
   whether it is like something to dream while dreaming, and whether what
   it is like is similar to (or relevantly different from) corresponding
   waking experiences.

2.1 Are dreams experiences?

   Cartesian dream skepticism depends on a seemingly innocent background
   assumption: that dreams are conscious experiences. If this is false,
   then dreams are not deceptive experiences during sleep and we cannot be
   deceived, while dreaming, about anything at all. Whether dreams are
   experiences is a major question for the ontology of dreams and closely
   bound up with dream skepticism.

   The most famous argument denying that dreams are experiences was
   formulated by Norman Malcolm (1956, 1959). Today, his position is
   commonly rejected as implausible. Still, it set the tone for the
   analysis of dreaming as a target phenomenon for philosophy of mind.

   For Malcolm, the denial of dream experience followed from the
   conceptual analysis of sleep: “if a person is in any state of
   consciousness it logically follows that he is not sound asleep”
   (Malcolm 1956: 21). Following some remarks of Wittgenstein’s (1953:
   184; see Chihara 1965 for discussion), Malcolm claimed

     the concept of dreaming is derived, not from dreaming, but from
     descriptions of dreams, i.e., from the familiar phenomenon that we
     call “telling a dream”. (Malcolm 1959:55)

   Malcolm argued that retrospective dream reports are the sole criterion
   for determining whether a dream occurred and there is no independent
   way of verifying dream reports. While first-person, past-tense
   psychological statements (such as “I felt afraid”) can at least in
   principle be verified by independent observations (but see Canfield
   1961; Siegler 1967; Schröder 1997), he argued dream reports (such as
   “in my dream, I felt afraid”) are governed by different grammars and
   merely superficially resemble waking reports. In particular, he denied
   dream reports imply the occurrence of experiences (such as thoughts,
   feelings, or judgements) in sleep:

     If a man had certain thoughts and feelings in a dream it no more
     follows that he had those thoughts and feelings while asleep, than
     it follows from his having climbed a mountain in a dream that he
     climbed a mountain while asleep. (Malcolm 1959/1962: 51–52)

   What exactly Malcolm means by “conscious experience” is unclear.
   Sometimes he seems to be saying that conscious experience is
   conceptually tied to wakefulness (Malcolm 1956); other times he claims
   that terms such as mental activity or conscious experience are vague
   and it is senseless to apply them to sleep and dreams (Malcolm 1959:
   52).

   Malcolm’s analysis of dreaming has been criticized as assuming an
   overly strict form of verificationism and a naïve view of language and
   conceptual change. A particularly counterintuitive consequence of his
   view is that there can be no observational evidence for the occurrence
   of dreams in sleep aside from dream reports. This includes behavioral
   evidence such as sleepwalking or sleeptalking, which he thought showed
   the person was partially awake; as he also thought dreams occur in
   sound sleep, such sleep behaviors were largely irrelevant to the
   investigation of dreaming proper. He also claimed adopting a
   physiological criterion of dreaming (such as EEG measures of brain
   activity during sleep) would change the concept of dreaming, which he
   argued was tied exclusively to dream reporting. This claim was
   particularly radical as it explicitly targeted the discovery of REM
   sleep and its association with dreaming (Dement & Kleitman 1957), which
   is commonly regarded as the beginning of the science of sleep and
   dreaming. Malcolm’s position was that the very project of a science of
   dreaming was misguided.

   Contra Malcolm, most assume that justification does not depend on
   strict criteria with the help of which the truth of a statement can be
   determined with absolute certainty, but “on appeals to the simplicity,
   plausibility, and predictive adequacy of an explanatory system as a
   whole” (Chihara & Fodor 1965: 197). In this view, behavioral and/or
   physiological evidence can be used to verify dream reports (Ayer 1960)
   and the alleged principled difference between dream reports and other
   first-person, past-tense psychological sentences (Siegler 1967;
   Schröder 1997) disappears.

   Putnam noted that Malcolm’s analysis of the concept of dreaming relies
   on the dubious idea that philosophers have access to deep conceptual
   truths that are hidden to laypeople:

     the lexicographer would undoubtedly perceive the logical (or
     semantical) connection between being a pediatrician and being a
     doctor, but he would miss the allegedly “logical” character of the
     connection between dreams and waking impressions. […] this “depth
     grammar” kind of analyticity (or “logical dependence”) does not
     exist. (Putnam 1962 [1986]: 306)

   Nagel argued that even if one accepts Malcolm’s analysis of the concept
   of dreaming,

     it is a mistake to invest the demonstration that it is impossible to
     have experiences while asleep with more import than it has. It is an
     observation about our use of the word “experience”, and no more. It
     does not imply that nothing goes on in our minds while we dream.
     (Nagel 1959: 114)

   Whether dream thoughts, feelings or beliefs should count as real
   instances of their kind now becomes an open question, and in any case
   there is no conceptual contradiction involved in saying one has
   experiences while asleep and dreaming.

2.2 Dreams as instantaneous memory insertions

   To ask about dream experience is also to ask whether there is something
   it is like to dream during sleep as opposed to there just being
   something it is like to remember dreaming after awakening. Dennett’s
   (1976, 1979) cassette theory says dreams are the product of
   instantaneous memory insertion at the moment of the awakening, as if a
   cassette with pre-scripted dreams had been inserted into memory, ready
   for replay. Dennett claims the cassette theory and the view that dreams
   are experiences can deal equally well with empirical evidence for
   instance on the relationship between dreaming and REM sleep. The
   cassette theory is preferable because it is more parsimonious, positing
   only an unconscious dream composition process rather than an additional
   conscious presentation process in sleep. For Dennett, the important
   point is that it is impossible to distinguish between the two rival
   theories based on dream recall; the question of dream experience should
   be settled by independent empirical evidence.

   While Dennett shares Malcolm’s skepticism about dream experience, this
   latter claim is diametrically opposed to Malcolm’s rejection of a
   science of dreaming. For Dennett, the unreliability of dream recall
   also is not unique, but exemplifies a broader problem with memory
   reports: we generally cannot use retrospective recall to distinguish
   conscious experience from memory insertion (Dennett 1991; see also
   Emmett 1978).

   An earlier and much discussed (Binz 1878; Goblot 1896; Freud 1899; Hall
   1981; Kramer 2007:22–24) version of Dennett’s cassette theory goes back
   to Maury’s (1861) description of a long and complex dream about the
   French revolution that culminated in his execution at the guillotine,
   at which point Maury suddenly awoke to find that the headboard had
   fallen on his neck. Because the dream seemed to systematically build up
   to this dramatic conclusion, which in turn coincided with a sudden
   external event, he suggested that such cases were best explained as
   instantaneous memory insertions experienced at the moment of awakening.
   Similarly, Gregory (1916) described dreams are psychical explosions
   occurring at the moment of awakening.

   The trustworthiness of dream reports continues to be contentious. Rosen
   (2013) argues that dream reports are often fabricated and fail to
   accurately describe experiences occurring during sleep. By contrast,
   Windt (2013, 2015a) argues that dream reports can at least under
   certain conditions (such as in laboratory studies, when dreams are
   reported immediately after awakening by trained participants) be
   regarded as trustworthy sources of evidence with respect to previous
   experience during sleep.

2.3 Empirical evidence on the question of dream experience

   Unlike Malcolm, many believe that whether dreams are experiences is an
   empirical question; and unlike Dennett, the predominant view is that
   the empirical evidence does indeed support this claim (Flanagan 2000;
   Metzinger 2003; Revonsuo 2006; Rosen 2013; Windt 2013, 2015a).

   A first reason for thinking that dreams are experiences during sleep is
   the relationship between dreaming and REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.
   Researchers in the 1950s discovered that sleep is not a uniform state
   of rest and passivity, but there is a sleep architecture involving
   different stages of sleep that is relatively stable both within and
   across individuals (Aserinsky & Kleitman 1953, 1955; Dement & Kleitman
   1957). Following sleep onset, periods of non-REM (or NREM) sleep
   including slow wave sleep (so called because of the presence of
   characteristic slow-wave, high-voltage EEG activity) are followed by
   periods of high-frequency, low-voltage activity during REM sleep. EEG
   measures from REM sleep strongly resemble waking EEG. REM sleep is
   additionally characterized by rapid eye movements and a near-complete
   loss of muscle tone (Dement 1999: 27–50; Jouvet 1999).

   The alignment between conscious experience on the one hand and
   wake-like brain activity and muscular paralysis on the other hand would
   seem to support the experiential status of dreams as well as explain
   the outward passivity that typically accompanies them. Reports of
   dreaming are in fact much more frequent following REM (81.9%) than NREM
   sleep awakenings (43%; Nielsen 2000). REM reports tend to be more
   elaborate, vivid, and emotionally intense, whereas NREM reports tend to
   be more thought-like, confused, non-progressive, and repetitive (Hobson
   et al. 2000). These differences led to the idea that REM sleep is an
   objective marker of dreaming (Dement & Kleitman 1957; Hobson 1988:
   154).

   Attempts to identify dreaming with mental activity during REM sleep
   have not, however, been successful, and many now hold that dreams can
   occur in all stages of sleep (e.g., Antrobus 1990; Foulkes 1993b; Solms
   1997, 2000; Domhoff 2003; Nemeth & Fazekas 2018). In recent years there
   has been renewed interest in NREM sleep for the study of dreaming
   (Noreika et al. 2009; Siclari et al. 2013, 2017). This suggests the
   inference from the physiology of REM sleep to the phenomenology of
   dreaming is not straightforward.

   A second line of evidence comes from lucid dreams, or dreams in which
   one knows one is dreaming and often has some level of dream control
   (Voss et al. 2013; Voss & Hobson 2015; Baird et al. 2019). The term
   lucid dreaming was coined by van Eeden (1913), but Aristotle (On
   Dreams) already noted that one can sometimes be aware while dreaming
   that one is dreaming.

   Scientific evidence that lucid dreaming is real and a genuine sleep
   phenomenon comes from laboratory studies (Hearne 1978; LaBerge et al.
   1981) showing lucid dreamers can use specific, pre-arranged patterns of
   eye movements (e.g., right-left-right-left) to signal in real-time that
   they are now lucid and engaging in dream experiments. These signals are
   clearly identifiable on the EOG and suggest a correspondence between
   dream-eye movements and real-eye movements (as predicted by the
   so-called scanning hypothesis; see Dement & Kleitman 1957;
   Leclair-Visonneau et al. 2010). Retrospective reports confirm that the
   dreamer really was lucid and signalled lucidity (Dresler et al. 2012;
   Stumbrys et al. 2014).

   Signal-verified lucid dreams have been used to study muscular activity
   accompanying body movements in dreams (Erlacher et al. 2003; Dresler et
   al. 2011), for advanced EEG analysis of brain activity during lucid
   dreaming (Voss et al. 2009), and imaging studies (Dresler et al. 2011,
   2012). Eye signals can also be used to measure the duration of
   different activities performed in lucid dreams; contrary to the
   cassette theory, lucid dreams have temporal extension and certain dream
   actions even seem to take slightly longer than in waking (Erlacher et
   al. 2014). There have also been attempts to induce lucidity through
   non-invasive electrical stimulation during sleep (Stumbrys et al. 2013;
   Voss et al. 2014). The combination of signal-verified lucid dreaming
   with volitional control over dream content, retrospective report, and
   objective sleep measures has been proposed to provide controlled
   conditions for the study of conscious experience in sleep and a new
   methodology for investigating the relationship between conscious
   experience and neurophysiological processes (Baird et al.2019).

   A third line of evidence (Revonsuo 2006: 77) comes from dream-enactment
   behavior (Nielsen et al. 2009), most prominently in patients with
   REM-sleep behavior disorder (RBD; Schenck & Mahowald 1996; Schenck
   2005; Leclair-Visonneau et al. 2010). Due to a loss of the muscular
   atonia that accompanies REM sleep in healthy subjects, these patients
   show complex, seemingly goal-directed outward behaviors such as running
   or fighting off an attacker during REM sleep. Retrospective dream
   reports often match these behaviors, suggesting that patients literally
   act out their dreams during sleep.

   While persuasive, these lines of evidence might not satisfy skeptics
   about dream experience. They might worry that results from lucid
   dreaming and dream enactment do not generalize to ordinary, non-lucid
   dreams; they might also construe alternative explanations that do not
   require conscious experience in sleep. There are also methodological
   concerns, for instance about how closely sleep-behaviors actually match
   dream experience. A key issue is that to support the experiential
   status of dreams, evidence from sleep polysomnography, signal verified
   lucid dreams, or sleep behavior requires convergence with retrospective
   dream reports. This means trusting dream reports is built into any
   attempt to empirically resolve the question of dream experience – which
   then invites the familiar skeptical concerns. Again, an anti-skeptical
   strategy may be to appeal to explanatory considerations. In this view,
   the convergence of dream reports and objective polysomnographic or
   behavioral observations is best explained by the assumption that dreams
   are experiences in sleep, and this assumption is strengthened by
   further incoming findings. This strategy places dream reports at the
   center of scientific dream research while avoiding the contentious
   claim that their trustworthiness, and with it the experiential status
   of dreams, can be demonstrated conclusively by independent empirical
   means (Windt 2013, 2015a).

2.4 Dreams and hallucinations

   Even where philosophers agree dreams are experiences, they often
   disagree on how exactly to characterize dreaming relative to wake-state
   psychological terms. Often, questions about the ontology of dreaming
   intersect with epistemological issues. Increasingly, they also
   incorporate empirical findings.

   The standard view is that dreams have the same phenomenal character as
   waking perception in that they seemingly put us in contact with
   mind-independent objects, yet no such object is actually being
   perceived. This means dreams count as hallucinations in the
   philosophical sense (Crane & French 2017; Macpherson 2013). Even if, in
   a particularly realistic dream, my visual experience was exactly as it
   would be if I were awake (I could see my bedroom, my hands on the bed
   sheets, etc.), as long as my eyes were closed during the episode, I
   would not, literally, be seeing anything.

   There is some controversy in the psychological literature about whether
   dreams should be regarded as hallucinations. Some believe the term
   hallucination should be reserved for clinical contexts and wake-state
   pathologies (Aleman & Larøi 2008: 17; but see ffytche 2007; ffytche et
   al. 2010).

   The view that dreams involve hallucinations is implicit in Descartes’
   assumption that even when dreaming,

     it is certain that I seem to see light, hear a noise, and feel heat;
     this cannot be false, and this is what in me is properly called
     perceiving (sentire). (Descartes 1641: II.9)

   It also lies at the heart of Aristotle’s (On Dreams) assumption that
   dreams result from the movements of the sensory organs that continue
   even after the original stimulus has ceased. He believed that in the
   silence of sleep, these residual movements result in vivid sensory
   imagery that is subjectively indistinguishable from genuine perception
   (see also Dreisbach 2000; Barbera 2008).

   The assumption of phenomenological equivalence between dream and waking
   experience can also be found in Berkeley’s (1710: I.18) idealist claim
   that the existence of external bodies is not necessary for the
   production of vivid, wake-like perceptual experience. Similarly,
   Russell defended sense-data theory by noting that in dreams,

     I have all the experiences that I seem to have; it is only things
     outside my mind that are not as I believe them to be while I am
     dreaming. (Russell 1948: 149–150)

   Elsewhere, he argued dreams and waking life

     must be treated with equal respect; it is only by some reality not
     merely sensible that dreams can be condemned. (Russell 1914: 69)

   Hume was less clear on this matter, proposing that dreams occupy an
   intermediate position between vivid and largely non-voluntary sensory
   impressions and ideas, or “the faint images of previous impressions in
   thinking and reasoning” (Hume 1739: 1.1.1.1). On the one hand, as mere
   creatures of the mind, Hume wanted to categorize dreams as ideas. On
   the other hand, he acknowledged that in sleep, “our ideas can approach
   the vivacity of sensory impressions” (Hume 1739: 1.1.1.1). Dreams do
   not fit comfortably into Hume’s attempt to draw a dichotomous
   distinction between impressions, including perception, and ideas,
   including sensory imagination (Ryle 1949; Waxman 1994; Broughton 2006).

   Phenomenologists often focus not so much on the quality of dream
   imagery as on the overall character of experience, noting that dreams
   are experienced as reality; as in waking perception, we simply feel
   present in a world. This also sets dreams apart from waking fantasy and
   daydreams (Husserl 1904/1905; Uslar 1964; Conrad 1968; Globus 1987: 89.

   At its strongest, the hallucination view claims that dreaming and
   waking experience are identical in both the quality of sensory imagery
   and their overall, self-in-a-world structure (Revonsuo 2006: 84). This
   claim is central to the virtual reality metaphor, according to which
   consciousness itself is dreamlike and waking perception a kind of
   online hallucination modulated by the senses (Llinás & Ribary 1994;
   Llinás & Paré 1991; Revonsuo 2006; Metzinger 2003, 2009).

   This seems to be empirically supported. Neuroimaging studies (Dang-Vu
   et al. 2007; Nir & Tononi 2010; Desseilles et al. 2011) show that the
   predominance of visual and motor imagery as well as strong emotions in
   dreams is paralleled by high activation of the corresponding brain
   areas in REM sleep, which may exceed waking; at the same time, the
   cognitive deficits often thought to characterize dreams such as the
   loss of self-awareness, the absence of critical thinking, delusional
   reasoning, and mnemonic deficits fit in well with the comparative
   deactivation of frontal areas (Hobson et al. 2000). Hobson (1988,
   Hobson et al. 2000) has argued that the vivid, hallucinatory character
   of dreaming results from the fact that in REM sleep, the visual and
   motor areas are activated in the same way as in waking perception, the
   sole difference being dreams’ dependence on internal signal generation.
   Horikawa and colleagues (2013) used neuroimaging data from sleep onset
   to predict the types of objects described in mentation reports, which
   they took to support the perceptual equivalence between dreaming and
   waking.

   Generally, versions of the hallucination view that suggest dreams
   replicate all aspects of waking perception are too vague to be
   informative. Especially for subtle perceptual activities (such as
   visual search), we might not know enough about dream phenomenology to
   make any strong claims (Nielsen 2010). Specifying points of similarity
   leads to a more informative and precise, but likely also more nuanced
   view. Dreams are heterogeneous, and some might be more perception-like
   while others resemble imagination (Windt 2015a). There might also be
   differences between or even within specific types of imagery. For
   example, visual imagery might be quite different from touch sensations,
   which tend to be rare in dreams (Hobson 1988). Visual dream imagery
   might overall resemble waking perception but lack color saturation,
   background detail and focus (Rechtschaffen & Buchignani, 1992).
   Classifying dreams as either hallucinatory or imaginative is further
   complicated by the fact that there is strong overlap in cortical
   activity associated with both visual imagery and perception (Zeidman &
   Maguire, 2016). This means even a strong overlap in cortical activity
   between, say, visual dream imagery and visual perception does not
   necessarily set dreaming apart from waking imagination.

   This is also true for evidence on eye movements in dreams. LaBerge and
   colleagues (2018) recently showed that eye tracking of objects is
   smooth in lucid dreaming and perceiving, but not in imagining. Drawing
   from this evidence, Rosen (forthcoming) suggests many dreams mimic the
   phenomenology of interacting with a stable world, including eye
   movements and visual search. Others argue we should not analogize dream
   imagery to mind-independent, scannable objects and that eye movements
   might instead be implicated in the generation of dream imagery (Windt
   2018).

2.5 Dreams and illusions

   Another way to make sense of the claim that dreaming has the same
   phenomenal character as waking perception is to say some kinds of dream
   imagery are illusory: they involve misperception of an external object
   as having different properties than it actually has (cf. Smith 2002;
   Crane & French 2017). The illusion view disagrees with the
   hallucination view on whether dreams have a contemporaneous external
   stimulus source.

   The illusion view has fallen out of favor but has a long history. The
   Ancients believed dreams have bodily sources. This idea underlies the
   practice of using dreams to diagnose illness, as practiced in the
   shrines at Epidaurus (Galen On Diagnosis in Dreams; van de Castle
   1994). Aristotle (On Dreams) thought some dreams are caused by
   indigestion, and Hobbes adopted this view, claiming different kinds of
   dreams could be traced to different bodily sensations. For instance,
   “lying cold breedeth Dreams of Feare, and raiseth the thought and Image
   of some fearfull object” (Hobbes 1651: 91).

   Appeals to the bodily sources of dreaming became especially popular in
   the 19^th and early 20^th centuries. Many believed specific dream
   themes such as flying were linked to sleeping position (Macnish 1838;
   Scherner 1861; Vold 1910/1912; Ellis 1911) and realizing, in sleep,
   that one’s feet are not touching the ground (Bergson 1914).

   There were also attempts to explain the phenomenology of dreaming by
   appealing to the absence of outward movement. The lack of appropriate
   feedback and of movement and touch sensations was thought to cause
   dreams of being unable to move (Bradley 1894) or of trying but failing
   to do something (Gregory 1918).

   Some proponents of the “Leibreiztheorie” (or somatic-stimulus theory)
   of dreaming attempted to go beyond anecdotal observations to conduct
   controlled experiments. Weygandt (1893) investigated the influence of
   various factors including breathing, blood circulation, temperature
   changes, urge to urinate, sleeping position, and visual or auditory
   stimulation during sleep on dream content (see Schredl 2010 for
   details). Singer (1924) proposed experiments on stimulus incorporation
   in dreams can inform claims on the ontology of dreaming: If dreams are
   sensations, a particular auditory stimulus should increase the
   frequency of dreams in nearby sleepers as well as the frequency of
   sound in their dreams, and it should decrease the range of quality and
   intensity of these dreams, making them overall more similar and
   predictable.

   Newer studies provide evidence for the incorporation of external
   stimuli in dreams, including light flashes, sounds, sprays of water
   applied to the skin (Dement & Wolpert 1958), thermal (Baldridge 1966),
   electrical (Koulack 1969), and verbal stimuli (Berger 1963; Breger et
   al. 1971; Hoelscher et al., 1981), as well as blood pressure cuff
   stimulation on the leg (Nielsen et al. 1995; Sauvageau et al. 1998).

   Muscular activity also often leaves its mark on dreams. It occurs
   throughout sleep but is especially frequent in REM sleep, mostly in the
   form of twitching but occasionally also in the form of larger,
   seemingly goal-directed movements (Blumberg 2010; Blumberg & Plumeau
   2016). The relation between outward and dream movements is complex: in
   some cases, outward movements might mirror dream movements, while in
   others, sensory feedback might prompt dream imagery (Windt 2018).

   Generally, it seems external and bodily stimuli can be related to
   varying degrees to dream and sleep onset imagery (Nielsen 2017; Windt
   2018; Windt et al. 2016). Some of these cases appear to fit the concept
   of illusion, as in when the sound of the alarm clock is experienced, in
   a dream, as a siren, or when blood pressure cuff inflation on the leg
   leads to dreams of wearing strange shoes (Windt 2018; for these and
   other examples, see Nielsen et al. 1995). In other cases, such as when
   blood pressure cuff stimulation on the leg prompts a dream of seeing
   someone else’s leg being run over, describing this as illusory
   misperception might be less straightforward.

   Saying that dreams can be prompted by external stimuli and that in some
   cases these are best described as illusions is different from the
   stronger claim, sometimes advanced by historical proponents of
   somatic-stimulus theory, that dreams generally are caused by external
   or bodily stimuli. As an example of the stronger claim, consider
   Wundt’s proposal that the

     ideas which arise in dreams come, at least to a great extent, from
     sensations, especially from those of the general sense, and are
     therefore mostly illusions of fancy, probably only seldom pure
     memory ideas which hence become hallucinations. (Wundt 1896: 179)

   This claim is likely too strong. It is also likely that appeals to
   external or bodily stimuli on their own cannot fully explain dream
   imagery, including when and how external stimuli are incorporated in
   dreams. Sensory incorporation in dreams is often hard to predict and
   indirect; associated imagery seems related not just to stimulus
   intensity, but also to short- and long term memories. A full
   explanation of dream content additionally has to take the cognitive and
   memory sources of dreaming into account (Windt 2018; Nielsen 2017; cf.
   Silberer 1919).

2.6 Dreams as imaginative experiences

   The most important rival to the hallucination view is that dreams are
   imaginative experiences (Liao & Gendler 2019; Thomas 2014). This can
   mean dream imagery involves imaginings rather than percepts (including
   hallucinations or illusions; McGinn 2004), that dream beliefs are
   imaginative and not real beliefs (Sosa 2007), or both (Ichikawa 2008,
   2009). An important advantage is that by assimilating dreams to
   commonplace mental states such as waking fantasy and daydreaming,
   rather than a rare and often pathological occurrence such as
   hallucinations, it provides a more unified account of mental life
   (Stone 1984). However, the reasons for adopting the imagination view
   are diverse, and dreams have been proposed to resemble imaginings and
   differ from perception along a number of dimensions (e.g. McGinn 2004,
   2005a,b; Thomas 2014). This issue is complicated by the fact that there
   is little agreement on the definition of imagination and its relation
   to perception (Kind 2013).

   One way is to deny dreams involve presence or the feeling of being in a
   world, which many believe is central to waking perception. Imagination
   theorists compare the sense in which we feel present in our dreams to
   cognitive absorption, as when we are lost in a novel, film, or vivid
   daydream (Sartre 1940; McGinn 2004; but see Hering 1947; Globus 1987).
   Some argue that reflexive consciousness or meta-awareness (as in lucid
   dreams) interrupts cognitive absorption and terminates the ongoing
   dream (Sartre 1940), essentially denying lucid dreams are possible.

   Another issue is whether dreams are subject to the will (Ichikawa
   2009). Imagination is often characterized as active and under our
   control (Wittgenstein 1967: 621, 633), involving “a special effort of
   the mind” (Descartes 1641: VI, 2), whereas perception is passive.
   Because dreams just seem to happen to us without being under voluntary
   control, they present an important challenge for the imagination view.
   Ichikawa (2009) argues lucid control dreams show dreams are generally
   subject to the will even where they are not under deliberate control.

   Dreams are widely described as more indeterminate than waking
   perception (James 1890: 47; Stone 1984). In scientific dream research,
   vagueness is regarded as one of three main subtypes of bizarreness
   (Hobson 1988; Revonsuo & Salmivalli 1995). An example are dream
   characters who are identified not by their behavior or looks, but by
   just knowing (Kahn et al. 2000, 2002; Revonsuo & Tarkko 2002). Dreams
   are also attention-dependent and lack foreground-background structure
   (Thompson 2014); while it is tempting to construe the dream world as
   rich in detail, there is no more to dreams than meets the eye, and many
   think dream experience is exhausted by what is the focus of selective
   attention (Hunter 1983; Thompson 2014).

   Indeterminacy is also related to the question of whether we dream in
   color or in black and white. Based on a review of historical and recent
   studies, Schwitzgebel (2002, 2011) argues there has been a shift in
   theories on dream color that coincides with the rise first of
   black-and-white and then color television. He argues it is unlikely
   that dreams themselves changed from colored to black and white and back
   to colored, proposing that a change in opinion is a more plausible
   explanation. Maybe dreams were either black and white or colored all
   along; or maybe they are indeterminate with respect to color, as may be
   the case for imagined or fictional objects; were this the case, it
   would strengthen the imagination view (Ichikawa 2009). Schwitzgebel’s
   main point is that reports of colored dreaming are unreliable and our
   opinions about dreams can be mistaken (but see Windt 2013, 2015a). This
   relates to Schwitzgebel’s (2011; Hurlburt & Schwitzgebel 2007) general
   skepticism about the reliability of introspection.

   The issue of dream color has led to a number of follow-up studies
   (Schwitzgebel 2003; Schwitzgebel et al. 2006; Murzyn 2008; Schredl et
   al. 2008; Hoss 2010). They suggest most people dream in color and a
   small percentage describe grayscale or even mixed dreams (Murzyn 2008)
   or dreams involving moderate color saturation (Rechtschaffen and
   Buchignani 1992). Indeterminacy is rarely reported.

   The imagination view has consequences for Cartesian dream skepticism.
   If dream pain does not feel like real pain, there is a fail-safe way to
   determine whether one is now dreaming: one need only pinch oneself
   (Nelson 1966; Stone 1984; but see Hodges & Carter 1969; Kantor 1970).
   As Locke put it,

     if our dreamer pleases to try, whether the glowing heat of a glass
     furnace, be barely a wandering imagination in a drowsy man’s fancy,
     by putting his hand into it, he may perhaps be wakened into a
     certainty greater than he could wish, that it is something more than
     bare imagination. (Locke 1689: IV.XI.8)

   If dreaming feels different from waking, this raises the question why
   we tend to describe dreams in the same terms as waking perception.
   Maybe this is because most people haven’t thought about these matters
   and they would find the imagination view plausible if they considered
   it (Ichikawa 2009). Or maybe

     it is just because we all know that dreams are throughout unlike
     waking experiences that we can safely use ordinary expressions in
     the narration of them. (Austin 1962: 42)

   Some authors classify dreams as imaginings while acknowledging they
   feel like perceiving. For example, Hobbes describes dreams as “the
   imaginations of them that sleep” (Hobbes 1651: 90), and imagination as
   a “decaying sense” (Hobbes 1651: 88). Yet he also uses the concepts of
   imagination and fancy to describe perception and argues “their
   appearance to us is Fancy, the same waking, that dreaming” (Hobbes
   1651: 86).

   In the scientific literature, the imagination view is complemented by
   cognitive theories. Foulkes (1978: 5) describes dreaming as a form of
   thinking with its own grammar and syntax, but allows that dream imagery
   is sufficently perception-like to deceive us. Domhoff’s neurocognitive
   model of dreaming (2001, 2003) emphasizes the dependence of dreaming on
   visuospatial skills and on a network including the association areas of
   the forebrain. The theory draws from findings on the partial or global
   cessation of dreaming following brain lesions (cf. Solms 1997, 2000),
   evidence that dreaming develops gradually and in tandem with
   visuospatial skills in children (Foulkes 1993a, 1999; but see Resnick
   et al. 1994), and results from dream content analysis supporting the
   continuity of dreaming with waking concerns and memories (the so-called
   continuity hypothesis; see Domhoff 2001, 2003; Schredl & Hofmann 2003;
   Schredl 2006; see also Nir & Tononi 2010).

2.7 Dreaming and waking mind wandering

   A number of researchers have begun to consider dreaming in the context
   of theories of mind wandering. Mind wandering is frequent in waking and
   involves spontaneous thoughts that unfold dynamically and are only
   weakly constrained by ongoing tasks and environmental demands (Schooler
   et al. 2011; Smallwood & Schooler 2015; Christoff et al. 2016). Based
   on phenomenological and neurophysiological similarities, dreams have
   been proposed to be an intensified form of waking mind wandering
   (Pace-Schott 2007, 2013; Domhoff 2011; Wamsley 2013; Fox et al. 2013).
   This basic idea seems to have been anticipated by Leibniz, who noted
   that the spontaneous formation of visions in dreams surpasses the
   capacity of our waking imagination (Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and
   Letters, Vol. I, 177–178).

   The analogy between dreams and waking mind wandering has been discussed
   in the context of cognitive agency. Metzinger (2013a,b, 2015) describes
   dreams and waking mind wandering as involving a cyclically recurring
   loss of mental autonomy, or the ability to deliberately control one’s
   conscious thought processes. Dreams and waking mind wandering are not
   mental actions but unintentional mental behaviors, comparable to
   subpersonal processes such as breathing or heartbeat. Because dreaming
   and waking mind wandering make up a the majority of our conscious
   mental lives, he argues that cognitive agency and mental autonomy are
   the exception, not the rule.

   This raises the question of how to make sense of lucid control dreams,
   which involve both meta-awareness and agency. Windt and Voss (2018)
   argue that in such cases, spontaneous processes including imagery
   formation co-exist alongside more deliberate, top-down control; they
   also argue metacognitive insight and control themselves can have
   spontaneous elements. This suggests spontaneity and control are not
   opposites, but a more complex account is needed. Possibly, certain
   dreams and instances of waking mind wandering can be both spontaneous
   and agentive.

   The analogy with mind wandering might help move forward the debate on
   the ontology of dreaming. In this debate, a common assumption is that
   dreams can be categorized as either hallucinatory or imaginative. Yet
   the application of these terms to dreams quickly runs into
   counterexamples and it is unclear they are mutually exclusive. One
   option is pluralism (Rosen 2018b), in which some aspects of dreaming
   are hallucinatory, others imaginative, and yet again others illusory.
   Another is that dreams are sui generis, combining aspects associated
   with wake states such as hallucinating, imagining, or perceiving in a
   novel manner without mimicking them completely. Windt (2015a) proposes
   that mind wandering, which describes a range of mental states loosely
   characterized by their spontaneous and dynamic character, might be
   particularly suitable for the characterization of dreaming precisely
   because that term leaves open more specific questions on the
   phenomenology of dreaming, allowing for variation in control,
   determinacy, and so on. This might be a good starting point for
   describing what is unique about dreaming while also acknowledging
   continuities across sleep-wake states and capitalizing on the strengths
   of the hallucination, illusion, imagination, and cognitive views.

2.8 The problem of dream belief

   The second strand of the imagination view argues that dream beliefs are
   not real beliefs, but propositional imaginings. This may or may not be
   combined with the claim that dream imagery is imaginative rather than
   perceptual (Sosa 2007; Ichikawa 2009).

   Denying that dream beliefs have the status of real beliefs only makes
   sense before the background of a specific account of what beliefs are
   and how they are distinguished from other mental states such as
   delusions or propositional imaginings. For instance, Ichikawa (2009)
   argues that if we follow interpretationist or dispositionalist accounts
   of belief, dream beliefs fall short of real beliefs. He claims dream
   beliefs lack connection with perceptual experience and fail to motivate
   actions; consequently, they do not have the same functional role as
   real beliefs. Moreover, we cannot ascribe dream beliefs to a person by
   observing them lying asleep in bed. Dream beliefs are often
   inconsistent with longstanding waking beliefs and acquired and
   discarded without any process of belief revision (Ichikawa 2009).

   This analysis of dream beliefs has consequences for skepticism. If
   dream beliefs are propositional imaginings, then we do not falsely
   believe while dreaming that we are now awake, but only imagine that we
   do (Sosa 2007). It is not clear though that this protects us from
   deception. If dream beliefs fall short of real beliefs, this might even
   make the specter of dream deception more worrisome: in mistaking dream
   beliefs for the real thing, we would now be deceived about the status
   of our own mental states (Ichikawa 2008).

   It is also not clear whether the same type of argument extends to
   mental states other than beliefs. As Lewis points out, a person might

     in fact believe or realize in the course of a dream that he was
     dreaming, and even if we said that, in such case, he only dreamt
     that he was dreaming, this still leaves it possible for someone who
     is asleep to entertain at the time the thought that he is asleep.
     (Lewis 1969: 133)

   Mental states other than believing such as entertaining, thinking, or
   minimally appraisive instances of taking for granted might be
   sufficient for deception (Reed 1979).

   The debate about dream beliefs is paralleled by a debate about whether
   delusions are beliefs or imaginings (see Currie 2000; Currie &
   Ravenscroft 2002; McGinn 2004; Bayne & Pacherie 2005; Bortolotti 2009;
   Gendler 2013). Both debates might plausibly inform each other,
   especially as dreams are sometimes proposed to be delusional (Hobson
   1999).

3. Dreaming and theories of consciousness

3.1 Dreaming as a model system and test case for consciousness research

   Dreams are a global state of consciousness in which experience arises
   under altered behavioral and neurophysiological conditions as compared
   to standard wakefulness; unlike other altered states of consciousness
   (such as drug-induced or deep meditative states) and pathological wake
   states (such as psychosis or neurological syndromes), dreams occur
   spontaneously and regularly in healthy subjects. For both reasons, many
   regard dreams as a test case for theories of consciousness or even an
   ideal model system for consciousness research (Churchland 1988;
   Revonsuo 2006).

   Existing proposals differ on the phenomenology of dreaming: referring
   to dream bizarreness, Churchland describes dream experience as robustly
   different from waking, whereas Revonsuo argues dreaming is similar to
   waking and the purest form of experience:

     the dreaming brain brings out the phenomenal level of organization
     in a clear and distinct form. Dreaming is phenomenality pure and
     simple, untouched by external physical stimulation or behavioural
     activity. (Revonsuo 2006: 75)

   Revonsuo argues dreaming reveals the basic, state-independent structure
   of consciousness to be immersive: “dreaming depicts consciousness first
   and foremost as a subjective world-for-me” (Revonsuo 2006: 75). This
   leads him to introduce the “world-simulation metaphor of
   consciousness”, according to which consciousness itself is essentially
   simulational and dreamlike. This is taken to support internalism about
   conscious experience.

   This latter claim is also contentious. Noë (2004: 213) argues that
   phenomenological differences between dreaming and waking (such as
   greater instability of visual dream imagery) result from the lack of
   dynamic interaction with the environment in dreams. He proposes this
   shows that neural states are sufficient for dreaming but denies they
   are also sufficient for perceptual experience.

   A possible problem for both views is their reliance on background
   assumptions about the phenomenology of dreaming and its disconnection
   from environmental stimuli and bodily sensations. Windt (2015a, 2018)
   argues both internalism and externalism mistakenly assume dreams to be
   isolated from external sensory input and own-body perception; she
   believes both the phenomenology of dreaming and its correlation with
   external stimuli are complex and variable. She argues the analysis of
   dreaming does not clearly support either side in the debate on
   internalism vs externalism (but see Rosen 2018a). Generally, in the
   absence of a well worked out theory of dreaming and its sleep-stage and
   neural correlates, proposals for using dreaming as a model system or
   test case run the risk of relying on an oversimplified description of
   the target phenomenon (Windt & Noreika 2011).

   Recent accounts appealing to generative models and predictive
   processing (Clark 2013b; Hohwy 2013) suggest a new, unified account of
   perception, imagination, and dreaming. In these accounts, different
   mental states, including perception and action, embody different
   strategies of hypothesis testing and prediction error minimization.
   Perception is the attempt to model the hidden external causes of
   sensory stimuli; action involves keeping the internal model stable
   while changing the sensory input. Clark argues that on such a model,

     systems that know how to perceive an object as a cat are thus
     systems that, ipso facto, are able to use a top-down cascade to
     bring about the kinds of activity pattern that would be
     characteristic of the presence of a cat. […] Perceivers like us, if
     this is correct, are inevitably potential dreamers and imaginers
     too. Moreover, they are beings who, in dreaming and imagining, are
     deploying many of the very same strategies and resources used in
     ordinary perception. (Clark 2013a: 764)

   Predictive processing accounts have also been used to explain specific
   features of dreaming. Bizarreness has been associated with the
   comparative lack of external stimulus processing, implying dream
   imagery is relatively unconstrained by prediction errors (cf. Hobson &
   Friston 2012; Fletcher & Frith 2008; Bucci & Grasso 2017). Windt (2018)
   suggests a predictive processing account of dream imagery generation
   that links bodily self-experience to own-body perception and subtle
   motor behaviors such as twitching in REM sleep (Blumberg 2010; Blumberg
   & Plumeau 2016). She argues that movement sensations in dreams, in
   relation to REM-sleep related muscle twitching, involve a form of
   bodily self-sampling in which coordinated muscular activity contributes
   to the generation and maintenance of a body model. This is important
   because in predictive processing accounts neither the bodily nor the
   external causes of sensory inputs are known; at the same time, having
   an accurate body model is a prerequisite for action, requiring the
   system to disambiguate between self- and other generated changes to
   sensory inputs. Especially in early development, sleep might provide
   the ideal conditions for exploring one’s own body via subtle but
   coordinated muscular activity while processing of visual and auditory
   stimuli is reduced.

   Dreams have also been suggested as a test case for whether phenomenal
   consciousness can be divorced from cognitive access (e.g., Block 2007;
   but see Cohen & Dennett 2011). Sebastián (2014a) argues that dreams
   provide empirical evidence that conscious experience can occur
   independently of cognitive access. This is because during (non-lucid)
   REM-sleep dreams, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) as the
   most plausible mechanism underlying cognitive access is selectively
   deactivated (see also Pantani et al. 2018). This would challenge
   theories linking conscious experience to access, such as
   higher-order-thought theory (Sebastián 2014b). However, both the
   hypoactivation of the dlPCF in REM sleep and its association with
   cognitive access have been debated. Fazekas and Nemeth (2018) suggest
   that certain kinds of cognitive access may be independent of dlPFC
   activation, necessitating a more complex account.

3.2 Dreams, psychosis, and delusions

   Dreaming has been suggested as a model system not just of waking
   consciousness in general, but also of psychotic wake states in
   particular. The analogy between dreaming and madness has a long
   philosophical history (Plato, Phaedrus; Kant 1766; Schopenhauer 1847)
   and finds particularly stark expression in Hobson’s claim that
   “dreaming is not a model of a psychosis. It is a psychosis. It’s just a
   healthy one” (Hobson 1999: 44). Gottesmann (2006) proposes dreaming as
   a neurophysiological model of schizophrenia. There is a rich discussion
   on the theoretical and methodological implications of dream research
   for psychiatry (see Scarone et al. 2007; d’Agostino et al. 2013; see
   Windt & Noreika 2011 as well as the other papers in this special issue)
   and a number of studies have investigated differences in dream reports
   from schizophrenic and healthy subjects (Limosani et al. 2011a,b).

   Rather than likening dreaming to waking in general or specific wake
   states such as psychosis, there have also been attempts to compare
   specific dream phenomena to wake-state delusions. Gerrans (2012, 2013,
   2014) focuses on character misidentification in dreams and delusions of
   hyperfamiliarity (such as the Frégoli delusion, in which strangers are
   mistakenly identified as family members, and déjà vu) to argue that
   anomalous experience and faulty reality testing both play a role in
   delusion formation. Rosen (2015) analyzes instances of thought
   insertion and of auditory hallucinations, which are key symptoms of
   schizophrenia, to raise broader questions about the altered sense of
   agency in dreams as compared to waking.

3.3 Beyond dreams: Dreamless sleep experience and the concepts of sleep,
waking, and consciousness

   Philosophers have focused almost exclusively on dreaming, largely
   leaving to the side questions about dreamless sleep including whether
   it is uniformly unconscious. In recent years there has been a surge of
   interest in the possibility of dreamless sleep experience and
   foundational issues about the definition of sleep and waking. This has
   been paralleled by growing interest in dreaming in NREM sleep.

   Conceptually, interest in dreamless sleep experience has been
   facilitated by the precise definition of dreaming offered by simulation
   views (Revonsuo et al. 2015). If dreams are immersive sleep experiences
   characterized by their here-and-now structure, it makes sense to ask
   whether this is true for all or just a subset of sleep-related
   experiences and whether non-immersive sleep experiences exist. By
   contrast, if dreaming is broadly identified with any conscious
   mentation in sleep (Pagel et al. 2001), there is no conceptual space
   for dreamless sleep experience.

   Following Thompson's (2014, 2015) discussion of dreamless sleep in
   Indian and Buddhist philosophy, Windt and colleagues (2016; see also
   Windt 2015b) introduce a framework for different kinds of dreamless
   sleep experience ranging from thinking and isolated imagery,
   perception, or bodily sensations, where these lack integration into a
   scene, to minimal kinds of experience lacking imagery or specific
   thought contents. A possible example of minimal phenomenal experience
   in sleep are white dreams, where people report having had experiences
   during sleep but cannot remember any details. Taken at face value, some
   white dream reports might describe experiences that lack reportable
   content (Windt 2015b); others might describe forgotten dreams or dreams
   with degraded content (Fazekas et al. 2018). Another example are
   reports of witnessing dreamless sleep, as described in certain
   meditation practices. This state is said to involve non-conceptual
   awareness of sleep, again in the absence of imagery or specific thought
   contents, and loss of sense of self (Thompson 2014, 2015). Some schools
   in Buddhist philosophy explain claims of deep and dreamless sleep by
   saying we never fully lose consciousness in sleep (Prasad 2000, 66; and
   Thompson 2014, 2015).

   Empirically, interest in dreamless sleep experience is paralleled by
   increasing interest in experiences in NREM sleep (Fazekas et al. 2018).
   Most researchers now accept that dreaming is not confined to REM sleep,
   but also occurs at sleep onset and in NREM sleep. The deeper stages of
   NREM sleep are particularly interesting as they involve roughly similar
   proportions of dreaming, unconscious sleep, and white dreams (Noreika
   et al. 2009: Siclari et al. 2013, 2017). In the search for the neural
   correlates of dreaming vs unconscious dreamless sleep, this makes
   comparisons within the same sleep stage possible and avoids confounds
   involved in comparing presumably dreamful REM sleep with presumably
   dreamless NREM sleep. Findings suggest that activity in the same
   parietal hot zone underlies dreaming in both NREM and REM sleep
   (Siclari et al. 2017).

   Where sleep and dream research have traditionally tried to identify the
   sleep stage correlates of dreaming, newer research suggests local
   changes occurring independently of sleep stages might in fact be more
   relevant. Traditionally regarded as global, whole-brain phenomena,
   there is now increasing evidence that sleep itself is locally driven,
   and local changes in sleep depth might be associated with changes in
   sleep-related experience (Siclari & Tononi 2017; Andrillon et al.
   2019). While sleep and dream research are often considered as separate
   fields, changes in how sleep in general and sleep stages in particular
   are defined appear closely associated with changes in the theoretical
   conception of dreaming and its empirical investigation.

   Historically, discoveries about dreaming have precipitated changing
   conceptions of sleep (for an excellent history of the study of sleep
   and dreaming, see Kroker 2007). Following Aristotle (On Sleeping and
   Waking), sleep was traditionally defined in negative terms as the
   absence of wakefulness and perception. This is still reflected in
   Malcolm’s assumption that “to a person who is sound asleep, ‘dead to
   the world’, things cannot even seem” (Malcolm 1956: 26). With the
   discovery of REM sleep, sleep came to be regarded as a heterogeneous
   phenomenon characterized by the cyclic alteration of different sleep
   stages. REM sleep was now considered as “neither sleeping nor waking.
   It was obviously a third state of the brain, as different from sleep as
   sleep is from wakefulness” (Jouvet 1999: 5). The folk-psychological
   dichotomy between sleep and wakefulness now seemed oversimplified and
   empirically implausible. At the same time dreaming, which had
   previously been considered as an intermediate state of half-sleeping
   and half-waking, came to be regarded as a genuine sleep phenomenon, but
   narrowed to REM sleep. Today, the framework for describing dreams and
   other sleep-related experiences is more precise, but dreaming has also
   been cast adrift from REM sleep.

   A closely associated issue is how to define waking. Crowther’s (2018)
   capacitation thesis casts waking consciousness as a state in which the
   individual is fully switched on to their environment, but also to their
   own epistemic (cf. O’Shaugnessy 2002) and agentive potential; the
   waking individual is empowered to act and think in certain ways, though
   this potential need not be actualized. By contrast, dreaming is an
   “imagining-of consciousness” (O’Shaughnessy 2002: 430) and
   consciousness is conceptually tied to wakefulness. Because in lucid
   dreams, the epistemic and agentive profile of waking is at least partly
   realized, they might, according to Crowther, be regarded as closer to
   waking than nonlucid dreams.

   This account of waking and sleep may also have consequences for the
   imagination model of dreaming and dream skepticism (Soteriou 2017). As
   in the imagination model, dreaming would be passive and action,
   including cognitive agency, would be tied to waking. If dreaming
   nonetheless involved passive episodes of imagining oneself to be
   active, one would be unable to tell that one were dreaming and
   imagining, as this insight would require the exercise of real agency.
   The sceptical consequence would be that when dreaming, one would lose
   agency as well as the capacity to gain insight into one’s current
   state. Yet our ability to know we are waking when waking would be
   unscathed; according to Soteriou, waking would thus have an epistemic
   function connected to the capacity to exercise agency over our mental
   lives.

   Finally, definitions of consciousness themselves are bound up with
   conceptions of sleep and dreaming. As dreaming went from a state whose
   experiential status was doubted to being widely recognized as a second
   global state of consciousness, consciousness sometimes came to be
   defined contrastively as that which disappears in deep, dreamless sleep
   and reappears in waking and dreaming (Searle 2000; Tononi 2008). In
   light of dreamless sleep experience, such definitions are problematic
   (Thompson 2014, 2015; Windt 2015b; Windt et al. 2016). Dreamless sleep
   experience has been proposed to be particularly relevant for
   understanding minimal phenomenal experience, or the conditions under
   which the simplest kind of conscious experience arises (Windt 2015b).
   The investigation of dreamless sleep might thus shed light on the
   transition from unconscious sleep to sleep-related experience.

4. Dreaming and the self

   We almost always have a self in dreams, though this self can sometimes
   be a slightly different (e.g. older or younger) version of our waking
   self or even a different person entirely. Dreams therefore raise
   interesting questions about the identity between the dream and waking
   self. Locke (1689) invites us to imagine two men alternating in turns
   between sleep and wakefulness and sharing one continuously thinking
   soul (Locke 1689: II.I.12). He argues that if one man retained no
   memory of the soul’s thoughts and perceptions while it was linked to
   the other man’s body, they would be distinct persons. His position is
   that personal identity depends on psychological continuity, including
   recall: in the absence of recall, as illustrated by the toy example of
   two people sharing one soul, continuous conscious thinking does not
   suffice for identity. Locke also rejects the possibility of unrecalled
   dreams and the idea that we dream throughout sleep, remembering only a
   small proportion of our dreams (Locke 1689: II.I.19).

   Valberg distinguishes between the subject of the dream (i.e., the dream
   self) and the sleeping person who is the dreamer of the dream and
   recalls it upon awakening (Valberg 2007). He argues that awakening from
   a dream involves crossing a chasm between discrete worlds with discrete
   spaces and times; it does not make sense to say that “the ‘I’ at these
   times [is] a single individual who crosses from one world to the other”
   (Valberg 2007: 69). According to Valberg, this is relevant to dream
   skepticism because there is no simple way to make sense of the claims
   that it is I who emerge from a dream or that I was the victim of dream
   deception.

   Vicarious dreams, or dreams in which the protagonist of the dream seems
   to be a different person from the dreamer, are particularly puzzling
   with respect to identity. They may even raise the question of whether
   the dream self has an independent existence (Rosen & Sutton 2013:
   1047). Such dreams are superficially similar to cases in which we
   imagine being another person, but according to Rosen and Sutton require
   a different explanation: in the case of dreaming, the imagined person’s
   thoughts are not framed as diverging from one’s own and one does not
   retain one’s own perspective in addition to the imagined one; in
   nonlucid dreams, only the perspective of the dream’s protagonist is
   retained.

   The dream self is also at the center of simulation views of dreaming,
   which define dreaming via its immersive, here and now character as the
   experience of a self in a world. This leads to further questions about
   the phenomenology of self-experience in dreams and how it is different
   from waking self-experience. Different versions of the simulation view
   focus on different aspects of self- and world experience in dreams,
   ranging from social simulation (Revonsuo et al. 2015) to the typical
   features of selfhood in dreams (Revonsuo 2005, 2006, Metzinger 2003,
   2009) to the minimal conditions for experiencing oneself as a self in
   dreams and what this tells us about minimal phenomenal selfhood in
   general (Windt 2015a, 2018). Yet these different versions of the
   simulation view are largely complementary and together have forged
   unity in a field that was previously hampered by lack of agreement
   about the definition of dreaming. They also integrate the philosophy of
   dreaming and scientific dream research.

   As so often in debates about dreaming, there is disagreement about
   basic phenomenological questions. Revonsuo (2005) describes
   self-experience including bodily experience in dreams as identical to
   waking, whereas Metzinger (2003, 2009; see also Windt & Metzinger 2007)
   argues that important layers of waking self-experience (such as
   autobiographical memory, agency, a stable first-person perspective,
   metacognitive insight, and self-knowledge) are missing in nonlucid
   dreams. He argues this is due to the cognitive and mnemonic deficit
   that characterizes nonlucid dreams (cf. Hobson et al. 2000). Windt
   (2015a) analyzes the range of cognitive and bodily self-experience in
   dreams, both of which she describes as variable. She argues that in a
   majority of cases, dreams are weakly phenomenally embodied states in
   which bodily experience is largely related to movement sensations but a
   detailed and integrated body representation is lacking; instead, bodily
   experience in dreams is largely indeterminate (for an attempt to test
   this empirically, see Koppehele-Gossel et al. 2016). She proposes this
   is because dreams are also weakly functionally embodied states, in
   which the specific pattern of bodily experience reflects altered
   processing of bodily sensations (as in the illusion view). She also
   analyzes instances of bodiless dreams, in which dreamers say they
   experienced themselves as disembodied entities, to argue that
   self-experience can be reduced to pure spatiotemporal-self-location
   (Windt 2010); she proposes these cases can help identify the conditions
   for the emergence of minimal phenomenal selfhood (Blanke & Metzinger
   2009; see also Metzinger 2013b).

5. Immorality and moral responsibility in dreams

   How the phenomenology of dreaming compares to waking and what to say
   about how the dream self relates to the waking self bears on questions
   about the moral status of dreams. For Augustine (Confessions) dreams
   were a cause of moral concern because of their indistinguishability
   from waking life. What particularly worried him about dreams of sexual
   acts was their vividness, as well as the feeling of pleasure and
   seeming acquiescence or consent on the part of the dreamer. He
   concluded, however, that the transition from sleep to wakefulness
   involves a radical chasm, enabling the dreamer to awaken with a clear
   conscience and absolving them from taking responsibility for their
   dream actions.

   What exactly Augustine thought the chasm between dreaming and waking
   consists in allows for different interpretations (Matthews 1981).
   Firstly, if the dream and waking self are not identical, then waking
   Augustine is not morally responsible for dream-Augustine’s actions.
   Secondly, actions performed in dreams might be morally irrelevant
   because they did not really happen. And thirdly, assuming that moral
   responsibility requires the ability to act otherwise, dreams provide no
   grounds for moral concern because we cannot refrain from having certain
   types of dreams.

   The issue of dream immorality may also present a choice point between
   different accounts of moral evaluation. Where internalists assume the
   moral status of a person’s actions is entirely determined by internal
   factors such as intentions and motives, externalists look beyond these
   to the effects of actions. Driver (2007) argues that the absurdity of
   dream immorality itself should count against purely internalist
   accounts; yet she also acknowledges this absurdity is not a necessary
   feature of dreams.

   Central to the question of dream immorality is the status of dreams as
   actions rather than mere behaviors. Mullane (1965) argues that while we
   don’t have full control over our dreams, they are not completely
   involuntary either; as is the case for blushing, considerable effort is
   required to attain control over our dreams and in some cases they can
   even be considered as actions. That lucid dream control is, to some
   extent, a learnable skill (Stumbrys et al. 2014) lends some support to
   this claim.

6. The meaning of dreams and the functions of dreaming

6.1 The meaning of dreams

   Philosophical discussions of dreaming tend to focus on (a) dream
   deception and (b) questions about the ontology of dreaming, its moral
   status, etc., that tend to intersect with dream skepticism. By
   contrast, the main source of interest in dreams outside of philosophy
   traditionally has been dream interpretation and whether dreams are a
   source of knowledge and insight. Historically, the epistemic status of
   dreams and the use of prophetic and diagnostic dreams was not just a
   theoretical, but a practical problem (Barbera 2008). Different types of
   dreams were distinguished by their putative epistemic value.
   Artemidorus, for instance, used the term enhypnion to refer to dreams
   that merely reflect the sleeper’s current bodily or psychological state
   and hence do not merit further interpretation, whereas he reserved the
   term oneiron for meaningful and symbolic dreams of divine origin.

   The practice of dream interpretation was famously attacked by Aristotle
   in On Prophecy in Sleep. He denied that dreams are of divine origin,
   but allowed that occasionally, small affections of the sensory organs
   as might stem from distant events that cannot be perceived in waking
   are perceptible in the quiet of sleep. He also believed such dreams
   were mostly likely to occur in dullards whose minds resemble an empty
   desert – an assessment that was not apt to encourage interest in dreams
   (Kroker 2007: 37). A similarly negative view was held by early modern
   philosophers who believed dreams were often the source of superstitious
   beliefs (Hobbes 1651; Kant 1766; Schopenhauer 1847).

   In Freudian dream theory, dream interpretation once more assumed a
   prominent role as the royal road to knowledge of the unconscious. This
   was associated with claims about the psychic sources of dreaming. Freud
   (1899) also rejected the influence of external or bodily sources, as
   championed by contemporary proponents of somatic-stimulus theory.

   In the neuroscience of dreaming, Hobson famously argued that dreams are
   the product of the random, brain-stem driven activation of the brain
   during sleep (Hobson 1988) and at best enable personal insights in the
   same way as a Rorschach test (Hobson et al. 2000). Dennett (1991)
   illustrates the lack of design underlying the production of dream
   narratives through the “party game of psychoanalysis”, which involves
   an aimless game of question-and-answer. In the game, players follow
   simple rules to jointly produce narratives that can seem symbolic and
   meaningful, even though no intelligent and deliberate process of
   narration was involved.

   Even if we grant that dreams are not messages from a hidden entity in
   need of decoding, this does not imply that dream interpretation cannot
   be a personally meaningful source of insight and creativity (Hobson &
   Wohl 2005). Whether and under which conditions, and following which
   methods, dream interpretation can lead to personally significant
   insights is an empirical question that is only beginning to be
   investigated systematically (see Edwards et al. 2013).

   Finally, throughout history, views on the epistemic status of dreams
   and the type of knowledge to be gained from dream interpretation (e.g.,
   knowledge about the future, diagnosis of physical illness, or insights
   about one’s current concerns) often changed in tandem with views on the
   origin and sources of dreaming, which gradually moved from divine
   origins and external sources, via the body, to the unconscious, and
   finally to the brain.

6.2 The functions of dreaming

   Different theories on the functions of dreaming have been proposed and
   the debate is ongoing. An important distinction is between the
   functions of sleep stages and the functions of dreaming.
   Well-documented functions of REM sleep include thermoregulation and the
   development of cortical structures in birds and mammals, as well as
   neurotransmitter repletion, the reconstruction and maintenance of
   little-used brain circuits, the structural development of the brain in
   early developmental phases, as well as the preparation of a repertoire
   of reflexive or instinctive behaviors (Hobson 2009). Yet none of these
   functions are obviously linked to dreaming. An exception is
   protoconsciousness theory, in which REM sleep plays an important role
   in foetal development by providing a virtual world model even before
   the emergence of full-blown consciousness (Hobson 2009: 808).

   Numerous studies have investigated the contribution of sleep to memory
   consolidation, with different sleep stages promoting different types of
   memories (Diekelmann et al. 2009; Walker 2009). However, only a few
   studies have investigated the relationship between dream content and
   memory consolidation in sleep (for a review, see Nielsen & Stenstrom
   2005). Dreams rarely involve episodic replay of waking memories (Fosse
   et al. 2003). The incorporation of memory sources seems to follow a
   specific temporal pattern in which recent memories are integrated with
   older but semantically related memories (Blagrove et al. 2011). Nielsen
   (2017) presents a model of how external and bodily stimuli on one hand
   and short- and long-term memories on the other hand form seemingly
   novel, complex, and dreamlike images at sleep onset; he proposes these
   microdreams shed light on the formation and sources of more complex
   dreams. There is also some evidence that dream imagery might be
   associated with memory consolidation and task performance after sleep,
   though this is preliminary (Wamsley & Stickgold 2009, 2010; Wamsley et
   al. 2010).

   Prominent theories on the function of dreaming focus on bad dreams and
   nightmares. It has long been thought that dreaming contributes to
   emotional processing and that this is particularly obvious in the
   dreams of nightmare sufferers or in dreams following traumatic
   experiences (e.g., Hartmann 1998; Nielsen & Lara-Carrasco 2007; Levin &
   Nielsen 2009; Cartwright 2010; Perogamvros et al. 2013). Based on the
   high prevalence of negative emotions and threatening dream content,
   threat simulation theory suggests that the evolutionary function of
   dreaming lies in the simulation of ancestral threats and the rehearsal
   of threatening events and avoidance skills in dreams has an adaptive
   value by enhancing the individual’s chances of survival (see Revonsuo
   2000; Valli 2008). A more recent proposal is social simulation theory,
   in which social imagery in dreams supports social cognition, bonds, and
   social skills. (Revonsuo et al. 2015).

   An evolutionary perspective can also be fruitfully applied to specific
   aspects of dream phenomenology. According to the vigilance hypothesis,
   natural selection disfavored the occurrence of those types of
   sensations during sleep that would compromise vigilance (Symons 1993).
   Dream sounds, but also smells or pains might distract attention from
   the potentially dangerous surroundings of the sleeping subject, and the
   vigilance hypothesis predicts that they only rarely occur in dreams
   without causing awakening. By contrast, because most mammals sleep with
   their eyes closed and in an immobile position, vivid visual and
   movement hallucinations during sleep would not comprise vigilance and
   thus can occur in dreams without endangering the sleeping subject.
   Focusing on the stuff dreams are not made of might then be at least as
   important for understanding the function of dreaming as developing a
   positive account.

   Finally, even if dreaming in general and specific types of dream
   content in particular were found to be strongly associated with
   specific cognitive functions, it would still be possible that dreams
   are mere epiphenomena of brain activity during sleep (Flanagan 1995,
   2000). It is also possible that the function of dreams is not knowable
   (Springett 2019).

   A particular problem for any theory on the function of dreaming is to
   explain why a majority of dreams are forgotten and how dreams can
   fulfill their putative function independently of recall. Crick and
   Mitchinson (1983) famously proposed that REM sleep “erases” or deletes
   surplus information and unnecessary memories, which would suggest that
   enhanced dream recall is counterproductive. Another problem is that
   dreaming can be lost selectively and independently of other cognitive
   deficits (Solms 1997, 2000).

   Some of the problems that arise for theories on the functions of
   dreaming can be avoided if we do not assume that dreaming has a
   specific function, separate from the function(s) of conscious wakeful
   states. This depends on the broader taxonomy of dreaming in relation to
   wakeful states. For example, if dreaming is continuous with waking mind
   wandering, imagination, and/or own-body perception, we should not
   expect it to have a unique function, but rather to express a similar
   function as these wakeful states, perhaps to varying degrees. Nor
   should we expect dreams to have a single function; the functions of
   dreaming might be as varied and complex as those of consciousness, and
   given the complexity of the target phenomenon, the failure to pin down
   a single function should not be surprising (Windt 2015a).

7. Conclusions

   Questions about dreaming in different areas of philosophy such as
   epistemology, ontology, philosophy of mind and cognitive science, and
   ethics are closely intertwined. Scientific evidence from sleep and
   dream research can meaningfully inform the philosophical discussion and
   has often done so in the past. The discussion of dreaming has also
   often functioned as a lens on broader questions about knowledge,
   morality, consciousness, and self. Long a marginalized area, the
   philosophy of dreaming and of sleep is central to important
   philosophical questions and increasingly plays an important role in
   interdisciplinary consciousness research, for example in the search for
   the neural correlates of conscious states, in conscious state
   taxonomies, and in research on the minimal conditions for phenomenal
   selfhood and conscious experience.

Bibliography

     * Aleman, A. and F. Larøi, 2008, Hallucinations: The Science of
       Idiosyncratic Perception, Washington, DC: American Psychological
       Association.
     * Andrillon, T., J. Windt, T. Silk, S. Drummond, M. Bellgrove, and N.
       Tsuchiya, 2019, “Does the mind wander when the brain takes a break?
       Local sleep in wakefulness, attentional lapses and mind-wandering”,
       Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13(949), doi:10.3389/fnins.2019.00949
     * Antrobus, J.S., 1990, “The Neurocognition of Sleep Mentation: Rapid
       Eye Movements, Visual Imagery, and Dreaming”, in Sleep and
       Cognition, R. Bootzin, J. Kihlstrom, and D. Schacter (eds.),
       Washington: American Psychological Association, pp. 3–24.
     * Aristotle, On Dreams, in Aristotle: On the Soul. Parva Naturalia.
       On Breath, (Loeb Classical Library No. 288), W.S. Hett (ed.),
       Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press, 1986.
     * –––, On Prophecy in Sleep, in Aristotle: On the Soul. Parva
       Naturalia. On Breath, (Loeb Classical Library No. 288), W.S. Hett
       (ed.), Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press, 1986.
     * –––, On Sleeping and Waking, in Aristotle: On the Soul. Parva
       Naturalia. On Breath, (Loeb Classical Library No. 288), W.S. Hett
       (ed.), Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press, 1986.
     * Artemidorus, The Interpretation of Dreams, R.J. White (ed.), New
       Jersey: Noyes Press, 1975.
     * Aserinsky, E. and N. Kleitman, 1953, “Regularly Occurring Periods
       of Eye Motility and Concurrent Phenomena during Sleep”, Sleep
       Medicine Review, 118: 273–274.
     * –––, 1955, “Two Types of Ocular Motility Occurring in Sleep”,
       Journal of Applied Physiology, 8: 1–10.
     * Augustine, Against the Academics, J.J. O’Meara (ed.), Westminster,
       MD: Newman Press, 1950.
     * –––, Confessions, H. Chadwick (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
       Press, 1991.
     * Austin, J.L., 1962, Sense and Sensibilia, G.J. Warnock (ed.),
       Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.
     * Ayer, A.J., 1960, “Professor Malcolm on Dreams”, Journal of
       Philosophy, 57: 517–535.
     * Baillet, A., 1691, La Vie de Monsieur Descartes, Paris: La Table
       Ronde.
     * Baird, B., S. Mota-Rolim, and M. Dresler, 2019, “The cognitive
       neuroscience of lucid dreaming”, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
       Reviews, 100: 305–323.
     * Baldridge, B.J., 1966, “Physical Concomittants of Dreaming and the
       Effect of Stimulation on Dreams”, Ohio State Medical Journal, 62:
       1272–1275.
     * Barbera, J., 2008, “Sleep and Dreaming in Greek and Roman
       Philosophy”, Sleep Medicine, 9: 906–910.
     * Barrett, D. and P. McNamara (eds.), 2007a, The New Science of
       Dreaming, Volume 1: Biological Aspects, Westport: Praeger
       Perspectives.
     * ––– (eds.), 2007b, The New Science of Dreaming, Volume 2: Content,
       Recall, Personality Correlates, Westport: Praeger Perspectives.
     * ––– (eds.), 2007c, The New Science of Dreaming, Volume 3: Cultural
       and Theoretical Perspectives, Westport: Praeger Perspectives.
     * Bayne, T.J. and E. Pacherie, 2005, “In Defence of the Doxastic
       Conception of Delusions”, Mind and Language, 20(2): 163–188.
     * Berger, R.J., 1963, “Experimental Modification of Dream Content by
       Meaningful Verbal Stimuli”, British Journal of Psychiatry, 109:
       722–740.
     * Bergson, H., 1914, Dreams, E.E. Slosson (ed. and trans.), New York:
       B.W. Huebsch. [Bergson 1914 available online]
     * Berkeley, G., 1710, “A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human
       Knowledge”, in Principles of Human Knowledge and Three Dialogues,
       H. Robinson (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1–96.
     * Binz, C., 1878, Über den Traum, Bonn: Adolph Marcus.
     * Blanke, O. and T. Metzinger, 2009, “Full-Body Illusions and Minimal
       Phenomenal Selfhood”, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(1): 7–13.
     * Block, N., 2007, “Consciousness, Accessibility, and the Mesh
       between Psychology and Neuroscience”, Behavioral and Brain
       Sciences, 30: 499–548.
     * Blumberg, M., 2010, “Beyond dreams: do sleep-related movements
       contribute to brain development?”, Frontiers in Neurology, 1(140),
       doi:10.3389/fneur.2010.00140
     * Blumberg, M., and A. Plumeau, 2016, “A new view of ‘dream
       enactment’ in REM sleep behavior disorder”, Sleep Medicine Reviews,
       30: 34–42.
     * Bortolotti, L., 2009, Delusions and Other Irrational Beliefs,
       Oxford: Oxford University Press.
     * Bostrom, N., 2003, “Are We Living in a Computer Simulation?”, The
       Philosophical Quarterly, 53(211): 243–255.
     * Bourdin, P., 1641, “Seventh Set of Objections”, reprinted in
       Moriarty 2008: 214–231.
     * Bradley, F.H., 1894, “The Failure of Movement in Dream”, Mind,
       3(11): 373–377.
     * Breger, L., I. Hunter, and R.W. Lane, 1971, The Effect of Stress on
       Dreams, New York: International Universities Press.
     * Broughton, J., 2002, Descartes’s Method of Doubt, Princeton &
       Oxford: Princeton University Press.
     * –––, 2006, “Impressions and Ideas”, in The Blackwell Guide to
       Hume’s Treatise, S. Traiger (ed.), Malden, MA & Oxford: Blackwell,
       pp. 43–57.
     * Browne, A., 1977, “Descartes’s Dreams”, Journal of the Warburg and
       Courtauld Institutes, 40: 256–273.
     * Bucci, A., and M. Grasso, 2017, “Sleep and dreaming in the
       predictive processing framework”, in T. Metzinger and W. Wiese
       (eds.), Philosophy and Predictive Processing (Volume 6), Frankfurt
       am Main: MIND Group.
     * Canfield, J.V., 1961, “Judgments in Sleep”, The Philosophical
       Review, 70: 224–230.
     * Cartwright, R.D., 2010, The Twenty-four Hour Mind: The Role of
       Sleep and Dreaming in our Emotional Lives, Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.
     * Chalmers, D.J., 2005, “The Matrix as Metaphysics”, in Grau 2005:
       132–176.
     * Chihara, C.S., 1965, “What Dreams Are Made On”, Theoria, 31:
       145–158.
     * Chihara, C.S. and J.A. Fodor, 1965, “Operationalism and Ordinary
       Language: A Critique of Wittgenstein”, American Philosophical
       Quarterly 2: 281–295; page reference is to the reprint in Dunlop
       1977.
     * Christoff, K., Z. Irving, K. Fox, R. Spreng, and J. Andrews-Hanna,
       2016, “Mind-wandering as spontaneous thought: a dynamic framework”,
       Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17(11): 718–731.
     * Churchland, P.S., 1988, “Reduction and the Neurobiological Basis of
       Consciousness”, in Consciousness in Contemporary Science, A. Marcel
       and E. Bisiach (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
       273–304.
     * Clark, A., 2005, “The Twisted Matrix: Dream, Simulation, or
       Hybrid?”, in Grau 2005: 177–197.
     * –––, 2013a, “Dreaming the Whole Cat: Generative Models, Predictive
       Processing, and the Enactivist Conception of Perceptual
       Experience”, Mind, 121(483), 753–771.
     * –––, 2013b, “Whatever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and
       the Future of Cognitive Science”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
       36(03), 181–204.
     * Clarke, D.M., 2006, Descartes: A Biography, Cambridge & New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
     * Cohen, M.A. and D.C. Dennett, 2011, “Consciousness Cannot Be
       Separated from Function”, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(8),
       358–364.
     * Cole, J.R., 1992, The Olympian Dreams and Youthful Rebellion of
       René Descartes, Urbana & Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
     * Conrad, T., 1968, Zur Wesenslehre des psychischen Lebens und
       Erlebens, (Phaenomenologica: Vol. 27), DenHaag: Nijhoff.
     * Crane, T. and C. French, 2017, “The Problem of Perception”, The
       Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition), Edward
       N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
       <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/perception-pro
       blem/>.
     * Crick, F. and G. Mitchinson, 1983, “The Function of Dream Sleep”,
       Nature, 304, 111–114.
     * Crowther, T., 2018, “Experience, dreaming, and the phenomenology of
       wakeful consciousness”, in F. Dorsch, F. MacPherson, & M.
       Nida-Rumelin (eds.), Phenomenal Presence, Oxford: Oxford University
       Press.
     * Currie, G., 2000, “Imagination, Delusion and Hallucination”, Mind &
       Language, 15(1), 168–183.
     * Currie, G. and I. Ravenscroft, 2002, Recreative Minds: Imagination
       in Philosophy and Psychology, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
     * D’Agostino, A., A. Castelnovo, and S. Scarone, 2013, “Dreaming and
       the Neurobiology of Self: Recent Advances and Implications for
       Psychiatry”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00680 [available online]
     * Dang-Vu, T.T., M. Schabus, M. Desseilles, S. Schwartz, P. Maquet,
       2007, “Neuroimaging of Sleep and Dreaming”, in Barrett and McNamara
       2007a: 95–114.
     * Dement, W.C., 1999, The Promise of Sleep. The Scientific Connection
       between Health, Happiness and a Good Night’s Sleep, London: Pan
       Books.
     * Dement, W.C. and N. Kleitman, 1957, “The Relation of Eye Movements
       during Sleep to Dream Activity: An Objective Method for the Study
       of Dreaming”, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53: 89–97.
     * Dement, W.C. and E. Wolpert, 1958, “The Relation of Eye Movements,
       Body Motility, and External Stimuli to Dream Content”, Journal of
       Experimental Psychology, 55: 543–553.
     * Dennett, D.C., 1976, “Are dreams experiences?”, The Philosophical
       Review, 85(2): 151–171.
     * –––, 1979, “The Onus Re Experiences: A Reply to Emmett”,
       Philosophical Studies, 35(April): 315–318.
     * –––, 1991, Consciousness Explained. Boston, New York & London:
       Little, Brown and Company.
     * Descartes, R., 1637, Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting
       the Reason, and Seeking Truth in the Sciences., G.B. Rawlings
       (ed.). [Descartes 1637 available online]
     * –––, 1641, Meditations on First Philosophy, reprinted in Moriarty
       2008: 1–64.
     * Desseilles, M., T.T. Dang-Vu, V. Sterpenich, and S. Schwartz, 2011,
       “Cognitive and Emotional Processes during Dreaming: A Neuroimaging
       View”, Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4): 998–1008.
     * Diekelmann, S., I. Wilhelm, and J. Born, 2009, “The Whats and Whens
       of Sleep-Dependent Memory Consolidation”, Sleep Medicine Reviews,
       13(5): 309–321.
     * Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, R.D. Hicks (ed.),
       Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1943.
     * Domhoff, G.W., 2001, “A New Neurocognitive Theory of Dreams”,
       Dreaming, 11: 13–33.
     * –––, 2003, The Scientific Study of Dreams: Neural Networks,
       Cognitive Development, and Content Analysis, Washington, DC:
       American Psychological Association.
     * –––, 2011, “The Neural Substrate for Dreaming: Is It a Subsystem of
       the Default Network?”, Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4):
       1163–1174.
     * Dreisbach, C., 2000, “Dreams in the History of Philosophy”,
       Dreaming, 10(1): 31–41.
     * Dresler, M., S.P. Koch, R. Wehrle, V.I. Spoormaker, F. Holsboer, A.
       Steiger, P. Sämann, H. Obrig, and M. Czisch, 2011, “Dreamed
       Movement Elicits Activation in the Sensorimotor Cortex”, Current
       Biology, 21(21): 1833–1837.
     * Dresler, M., R. Wehrle, V.I. Spoormaker, S.P. Koch, F. Holsboer, A.
       Steiger, H. Obrig, P. Sämann, and M. Czisch, 2012, “Neural
       Correlates of Dream Lucidity Obtained from Contrasting Lucid versus
       Non-lucid REM Sleep: A Combined EEG/fMRI Case Study”, Sleep, 35(7):
       1017–1020.
     * Driver, J., 2007, “Dream immorality”, Philosophy, 82(1): 5–22.
     * Dunlop, C.E.M. (ed.), 1977, Philosophical Essays on Dreaming.
       Ithaca & London: Cornell University Press.
     * Edwards, C.L., P.M. Ruby, J.E. Malinowski, P.D. Bennett, and M.T.
       Blagrove, 2013, “Dreaming and Insight”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00979 [available online]
     * Ellis, H., 1911, The World of Dreams, London: Constable & Company
       LTD.
     * Emmett, K., 1978, “Oneiric Experiences”, Philosophical Studies,
       34(November): 445–450.
     * Erlacher, D., M. Schredl, and S. LaBerge, S., 2003, “Motor Area
       Activation during Dreamed Hand Clenching: A Pilot Study on EEG
       Alpha Band”, Sleep and Hypnosis, 5: 182–187.
     * Erlacher, D., M. Schädlich, T. Stumbrys, and M. Schredl, 2014,
       “Time for Actions in Lucid Dreams: Effects of Task Modality,
       Length, and Complexity”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.01013 [available online]
     * Fazekas, P., and G. Nemeth, 2018, “Dream experiences and the neural
       correlates of perceptual consciousness and cognitive access”,
       Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B (Biological
       Sciences), 373(1755): 20170356.
     * Fazekas, P., G. Nemeth, and M. Overgaard, 2019, “White dreams are
       made of colours: What studying contentless dreams can teach about
       the neural basis of dreaming and conscious experiences”, Sleep
       Medicine Reviews, 43: 84–91.
     * ffytche, D.H., 2007, “Visual Hallucinatory Syndromes: Past,
       Present, and Future”, Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 9(2):
       173–189.
     * ffytche, D.H., J.D. Blom, and M. Catani, 2010, “Disorders of Visual
       Perception”, Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry,
       81(11): 1280–1287.
     * Flanagan, O., 1995, “Deconstructing Dreams: The Spandrels of
       Sleep”, The Journal of Philosophy, 92: 5–27.
     * –––, 2000, Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams, and the Evolution of the
       Conscious Mind, Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.
     * Fletcher, P.C. and C.D. Frith, 2008, “Perceiving is Believing: A
       Bayesian Approach to Explaining the Positive Symptoms of
       Schizophrenia”, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1): 48–58.
     * Fosse, M.J., R. Fosse, J.A. Hobson, and R.J. Stickgold, 2003,
       “Dreaming and Episodic Memory: A Functional Dissociation?”, Journal
       of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15: 1–9.
     * Foulkes, D., 1978, A Grammar of Dreams, New York: Basic Books.
     * –––, 1993a, “Children’s Dreaming”, in Dreaming as Cognition, C.
       Cavallero and D. Foulkes (eds.), New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf,
       pp. 114–132.
     * –––, 1993b, “Dreaming and REM Sleep”, Journal of Sleep Research,
       2:199–202.
     * –––, 1999, Children’s Dreaming and the Development of
       Consciousness, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
     * Fox, K.C.R., S. Nijeboer, E. Solomonova, G.W. Domhoff, and K.
       Christoff, 2013, “Dreaming as Mind Wandering: Evidence from
       Functional Neuroimaging and First-Person Content Reports”,
       Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
       [available online]
     * Frankfurt, H.G., 1970, Demons, Dreamers, and Madmen: The Defense of
       Reason in Descartes’s Meditations, Princeton & Oxford: Princeton
       University Press.
     * Freud, S., 1899, Die Traumdeutung, Frankfurt am Main: Fischer
       Taschenbuch Verlag (2003).
     * –––, 1940, Schriften über Träume und Traumdeutungen, Frankfurt am
       Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag (2003).
     * Galen, On Diagnosis in Dreams, L. Pearcy (ed.), <available online>.
     * Gerrans, P., 2012, “Dream Experience and a Revisionist Account of
       Delusions of Misidentification”, Consciousness and Cognition,
       21(1): 217–227.
     * –––, 2013, “Delusional Attitudes and Default Thinking”, Mind &
       Language, 28(1): 83–102.
     * –––, 2014, “Pathologies of Hyperfamiliarity in Dreams, Delusions
       and Déjà Vu”, Frontiers in Psychology, 5,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00097 [available online]
     * Globus, G.G., 1987, Dream Life, Wake Life: The Human Condition
       Through Dreams, New York: State University of New York Press.
     * Goblot, 1896, “Sur le souvenir des rêves”, Revue philosophique,
       XLII.
     * Gottesmann, C., 2006, “The Dreaming Sleep Stage: A New
       Neurobiological Model of Schizophrenia?”, Neuroscience, 140:
       1105–1115.
     * Grau, C. (ed.), 2005, Philosophers Explore the Matrix, C. Grau
       (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
     * Gregory, J.C., 1916, “Dreams as Psychical Explosions”, Mind,
       25(98): 193–205.
     * –––, 1918, “The Dream of ‘Frustrated Effort’: A Suggested
       Explanation”, Mind, 27(105): 125–128.
     * Grundmann, T., 2002, “Die Struktur des skeptischen Traumarguments”,
       Grazer Philosophische Studien, 64: 57–81.
     * Hacking, I., 2001, “Dreams in Place”, Journal of Aesthetics and Art
       Criticism, 59(3):244–260.
     * Hall, C.S., 1981, “Do We Dream during Sleep? Evidence for the
       Globot Hypothesis”, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 53(1): 239–246.
     * Hartmann, E., 1998, Dreams and Nightmares: The New Theory on the
       Origin and Meaning of Dreams, Cambridge: Perseus Books.
     * Hearne, K., 1978, Lucid Dreams: An Electro-Physiological and
       Psychological Study, (Ph.D. thesis), University of Liverpool,
       England. [Hearne 1978 available online]
     * Hering, J., 1947, “Concerning Image, Idea, and Dream”, Philosophy
       and Phenomenological Research, 8(2): 188–205.
     * Hobbes, T., 1651, Leviathan, C.B. Macpherson (ed.), London: Penguin
       (1985).
     * –––, 1641, “Third Set of Objections”, reprinted in Moriarty 2008:
       107–124.
     * Hobson, J.A., 1988, The Dreaming Brain, New York: Basic Books.
     * –––, 1999, Dreaming as Delirium. How the Brain Goes Out of Its
       Mind, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
     * –––, 2009, “REM Sleep and Dreaming: Towards a Theory of
       Protoconsciousness”, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(November):
       803–813.
     * Hobson, J. and K. Friston, 2012, “Waking and Dreaming
       Consciousness: Neurobiological and Functional Considerations”,
       Progress in Neurobiology, 98(1): 82–98.
     * Hobson, J., E.F. Pace-Schott, and R. Stickgold, 2000, “Dreaming and
       the Brain. Toward a Cognitive Neuroscience of Conscious States”,
       Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23: 793–842.
     * Hobson, J. and H. Wohl, 2005, From Angels to Neurones. Art and the
       New Science of Dreaming, Parma: Mattioli 1885.
     * Hodges, M. and W.R. Carter, 1969, “Nelson on Dreaming a Pain”,
       Philosophical Studies, 20(3): 43–46.
     * Hoelscher, T.J., E. Klinger, and S.G. Barta, 1981, “Incorporation
       of Concern- and Nonconcern-related Verbal Stimuli into Dream
       Content”, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 90: 88–91.
     * Hohwy, J., 2013, The Predictive Mind, Oxford: Oxford University
       Press.
     * Horikawa, T., M. Tamaki, Y. Miyawaki, and Y. Kamitani, 2013,
       “Neural Decoding of Visual Imagery during Sleep”, Science
       340(6132): 639–642.
     * Hoss, R.J., 2010, “Content Analysis on the Potential Significance
       of Color in Dreams: A Preliminary Investigation”, International
       Journal of Dream Research, 3(1): 80–90.
     * Hume, D., 1739, A Treatise of Human Nature, D.F. Norton, M.J.
       Norton (eds.), Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press (2000).
     * Hunter, J. F. M., 1983, “The difference between dreaming and being
       awake”, Mind, 92(365): 80–93.
     * Hurlburt, R.T. and E. Schwitzgebel, 2007, Describing Inner
       Experience?: Proponent Meets Skeptic, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT
       Press.
     * Husserl, E., 1904/1905, Phantasie und Bildbewußtsein, E. Marbach
       (ed.), Hamburg: Felix Meiner (2006).
     * Ichikawa, J., 2008, “Scepticism and the Imagination Model of
       Dreaming”, The Philosophical Quarterly, 58(232): 519–527.
     * –––, 2009, “Dreaming and Imagination”, Mind & Language, 24(1):
       103–121.
     * James, W., 1890, The Principles of Psychology, Volume Two, New
       York: Dover Publications (1950).
     * Jouvet, M., 1999, The Paradox of Sleep: The Story of Dreaming, L.
       Garey (ed.), Cambridge & London: MIT Press.
     * Kahn, D., E.F. Pace-Schott, and J.A. Hobson, 2002, “Emotion and
       Cognition: Feeling and Character Identification in Dreaming”,
       Consciousness and Cognition, 11: 34–50.
     * Kahn, D., R. Stickgold, E.F. Pace-Schott, and J.A. Hobson, 2000,
       “Dreaming and Waking Consciousness: A Character Recognition Study”,
       Journal of Sleep Research, 9: 317–325.
     * Kant, I., 1766 [2002], Träume eines Geistersehers, erläutert durch
       Träume der Metaphysik, Stuttgart: Reclam.
     * Kantor, J., 1970, “Pinching and Dreaming”, Philosophical Studies,
       21(1–2): 28–32.
     * Keefer, M.H., 1996, “The Dreamer’s Path: Descartes and the
       Sixteenth Century”, Renaissance Quarterly, 49(1): 30–76.
     * Kind, A., 2013, “The heterogeneity of the imagination”, Erkenntnis,
       78(1): 141–159.
     * Klein, P., 2015, “Skepticism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
       Philosophy (Summer 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
       <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2015/entries/skepticism/>.
     * Koppehele-Gossel, J., A. Klimke, K. Schermelleh-Engel, and U. Voss,
       2016, “A template model of embodiment while dreaming: Proposal of a
       mini-me.” Consciousness and Cognition, 46: 148–162.
     * Koulack, D., 1969, “Effects of Somatosensory Stimulation on Dream
       Content”, Archives of General Psychiatry, (20): 718–725.
     * Kramer, M., 2007, The Dream Experience: A Systematic Exploration,
       New York & London: Routledge.
     * Kroker, K., 2007, The Sleep of Others and the Transformations of
       Sleep Research, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
     * LaBerge, S., 2007, “Lucid Dreaming”, in Barrett and McNamara 2007a:
       307–328.
     * LaBerge, S., L.E. Nagel, W.C. Dement, and V.P. Zarcone, 1981,
       “Lucid Dreaming Verified by Volitional Communication during REM
       Sleep”, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 52: 727–732.
     * LaBerge, S., B. Baird, and P. Zimbardo, 2018, “Smooth tracking of
       visual targets distinguishes lucid REM sleep dreaming and waking
       perception from imagination”, Nature Communications, 9(1),
       doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05547-0
     * Leclair-Visonneau, L., D. Oudiette, B. Gaymard, S. Leu-Semenescu,
       and I. Arnulf, 2010, “Do the Eyes Scan Dream Images during Rapid
       Eye Movement Sleep? Evidence from the Rapid Eye Movement Sleep
       Behaviour Disorder Model”, Brain, 133(6): 1737–1746.
     * Leibniz, G.W., 1880, Die Philosophischen Schriften, Berlin:
       Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
     * –––, Philosophical Papers and Letters, L.E. Loemker (ed.), Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1956.
     * Levin, R. and T.A. Nielsen, 2009, “Nightmares, Bad Dreams, and
       Emotions Dysregulation: A Review and New Neurocognitive Model of
       Dreaming”, Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18(2):
       84–88.
     * Lewis, H.D., 1969, The Elusive Mind, London: George Allan & Unwin
       LTD.
     * Liao, Shen-yi and Gendler, Tamar, “Imagination”, The Stanford
       Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
       (ed.), URL =
       <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/imagination/>.
     * Limosani, I., A. D’Agostino, M.L. Manzone, and S. Scarone, 2011a,
       “The Dreaming Brain/Mind, Consciousness and Psychosis”,
       Consciousness & Cognition, 20(4): 987–992.
     * –––, 2011b, “Bizarreness in Dream Reports and Waking Fantasies of
       Psychotic, Schizophrenic and Manic Patients: Empirical Evidences
       and Theoretical Consequences”, Psychiatry Research, 189(2):
       195–199.
     * Llinás, R. and D. Paré, 1991, “Of Dreaming and Wakefulness”,
       Neuroscience, 44: 521–535.
     * Llinás, R. and U. Ribary, 1994, “Perception as an Oneiric-like
       State Modulated by the Senses”, in Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of
       the Brain, C. Koch and J. Davis (eds.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       pp. 111–124.
     * Locke, J., 1689, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, R.
       Woolhouse (ed.), London: Penguin (1997).
     * Macnish, R., 1838, The Philosophy of Sleep, Glasgow: W.R. M’Phun.
     * Macpherson, F., 2013, “The Philosophy and Psychology of
       Hallucination: An Introduction”, in Hallucination. Philosophy and
       Psychology, F. Macpherson and D. Platchias (eds.), Cambridge MA:
       MIT Press, pp. 1–38.
     * Malcolm, N., 1956, “Dreaming and Skepticism”, The Philosophical
       Review, 65(1): 14–37.
     * –––, 1959, Dreaming, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
     * Matthews, G.B., 1981, “On Being Immoral in a Dream”, Philosophy,
       56(January): 47–64.
     * –––, 2005, Augustine, Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub.
     * Maury, L.-F. A., 1861, Le sommeil et les rêves: études
       psychologiques sur ces phénomènes et les divers états qui s’y
       rattachent, Paris: Didier et Cie Libraires-Éditeurs.
     * McGinn, C., 2004, Mindsight: Image, Dream, Meaning, Cambridge, MA &
       London: Harvard University Press.
     * –––, 2005a, “The Matrix of Dreams”, in Grau 2005: 62–70.
     * –––, 2005b, The Power of Movies: How Screen and Mind Interact, New
       York: Vintage Books.
     * Metzinger, T., 2003, Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of
       Subjectivity, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT Press.
     * –––, 2009, The Ego Tunnel: The Science of the Mind and the Myth of
       the Self, New York: Basic Books.
     * –––, 2013a, “The Myth of Cognitive Agency: Subpersonal Thinking as
       a Cyclically Recurring Loss of Mental Autonomy”, Frontiers in
       Psychology, 4, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00931 [available online]
     * –––, 2013b, “Why Are Dreams Interesting for Philosophers? The
       Example of Minimal Phenomenal Selfhood, Plus an Agenda for Future
       Research”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00746
       [available online]
     * –––, 2015, “M-autonomy”, Journal of Consciousness Studies,
       22(11–12): 270–302.
     * Montaigne, M. de, “The Apology for Raymond Sebond”, in Readings in
       the History of Philosophy, R.M. Popkin (ed.), The Philosophy of the
       16th and 17th Centuries, Toronto: Collier-Macmillan (1966): 70–81.
     * Moriarty, M. (ed.), 2008, Meditations, Objections, and Replies,
       Oxford: Oxford University Press.
     * Mullane, H., 1965, “Moral Responsibility for Dreams”, Dialogue,
       4(02): 224–229.
     * –––, 1966, “Dreaming as an Action”, Dialogue, 5(02): 239–242.
     * Murzyn, E., 2008, “Do We Only Dream in Colour? A Comparison of
       Reported Dream Colour in Younger and Older Adults with Different
       Experiences of Black and White Media”, Consciousness and Cognition,
       17: 1228–1237.
     * Nagel, T., 1959, “Dreaming”, Analysis, 19(5): 112–116.
     * –––, 1974, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?”, Philosophical Review,
       83: 435–450.
     * Nelson, J.O., 1966, “Can One Tell that He is Awake by Pinching
       Himself?”, Philosophical Studies, 17(6): 81–84.
     * Nemeth, G., and P. Fazekas, 2018, “Beyond the REM--NREM Dichotomy:
       A Multidimensional Approach to Understanding Dreaming”, Journal of
       Consciousness Studies, 25(11–12): 13–33.
     * Newman, L., 2019, “Descartes’ Epistemology”, The Stanford
       Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
       (ed.), URL =
       <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/descartes-epis
       temology/>.
     * Nielsen, T.A., 2000, “A Review of Mentation in REM and NREM Sleep:
       ‘Covert’ REM Sleep as a Possible Reconciliation of Two Opposing
       Models”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(6): 851–866.
     * –––, 2010, “Dream Analysis and Classification: The Reality
       Simulation Perspective”, in Principles and Practice of Sleep
       Medicine, M. Kryger, T. Roth, and W.C. Dement (eds.), New York:
       Elsevier, pp. 595–603.
     * –––, 2017, “Microdream neurophenomenology”, Neuroscience of
       Consciousness, 1: nix001; doi:10.1093/nc/nix001
     * Nielsen, T.A. and J. Lara-Carrasco, 2007, “Nightmares, Dreaming,
       and Emotion Regulation: A Review”, in Barrett and McNamara 2007b:
       253–284.
     * Nielsen, T.A. and P. Stenstrom, 2005, “What Are the Memory Sources
       of Dreaming?”, Nature, 437(7063): 1286–1289.
     * Nielsen, T.A., L. Ouellet, and A.L. Zadra, 1995, “Pressure
       Stimulation during REM Sleep Alters Dream Limb Activity and Body
       Bizarreness”, Sleep Research, 24: 134.
     * Nielsen, T.A., C. Svob, and D. Kuiken, 2009, “Dream-Enacting
       Behaviors in a Normal Population”, Sleep, 32(12): 1629–1636.
     * Nir, Y. and G. Tononi, 2010, “Dreaming and the Brain: From
       Phenomenology to Neurophysiology”, Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
       14(2): 88–100.
     * Noë, A., 2004, Action in Perception, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT
       Press.
     * Noreika, V., K. Valli, H. Lahtela, and A. Revonsuo. “Early-night
       serial awakenings as a new paradigm for studies on NREM dreaming”,
       International Journal of Psychophysiology, 74(1): 14–18.
     * O’Shaughnessy, B., 2002, “Dreaming”, Inquiry, 45: 399–432.
     * Pace-Schott, E.F., 2007, “The Frontal Lobes and Dreaming”, in
       Barrett and McNamara 2007b: 115–154.
     * –––, 2013, “Dreaming as a Story-Telling Instinct”, Frontiers in
       Psychology, 4, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00159 [available online]
     * Pagel, J.F., M. Blagrove, R. Levin, B. States, B. Stickgold, and S.
       White, 2001, “Definitions of Dream: A Paradigm for Comparing Field
       Descriptive Specific Studies of Dream”, Dreaming, 11: 195–202.
     * Pantani, M., A. Tagini, and A. Raffone, 2018, “Phenomenal
       consciousness, access consciousness and self across waking and
       dreaming: bridging phenomenology and neuroscience”, Phenomenology
       and the Cognitive Sciences 17(1): 175–197.
     * Perogamvros, L., T.T. Dang-Vu, M. Desseilles, S. Schwartz, 2013,
       “Sleep and Dreaming Are for Important Matters”, Frontiers in
       Psychology, 4, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00474 [available online]
     * Plato, Phaedrus, B. Jowett (ed.), in The Internet Classics Archive,
       available online.
     * –––, Theaetetus, B. Jowett (ed.), in The Internet Classics Archive,
       available online.
     * Prasad, H.S., 2000, “Dreamless Sleep and Soul: a controversy
       between Vedānta and Buddhism”, Asian Philosophy, 10(1): 61–73.
       doi:10.1080/09552360050001770
     * Putnam, H., 1981, “Brains in a Vat”, in Reason, Truth and History,
       H. Putnam (ed.), Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press,
       pp. 1–21.
     * –––, 1962 [1986], “Dreaming and ‘Depth Grammar’”, in Analytical
       Philosophy First Series, R. Butler (ed.), Oxford: Basil Blackwell &
       Mott; page reference is to the reprint in H. Putnam (ed.), 1986,
       Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2.: Mind, Language and Reality,
       Cambridge: University Press, pp. 304–324.
     * Rechtschaffen, A. and C. Buchignani, 1992, “The Visual Appearance
       of Dreams”, in The Neuropsychology of Sleep and Dreaming, J.S.
       Antrobus and M. Bertini (eds.), Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum,
       pp. 143–156.
     * Reed, T.M., 1979, “Dreams, Scepticism and Waking Life”, in Body,
       Mind, and Method. Essays in Honor of Virgil C. Aldrich, D.F.
       Gustafson and B.L. Tapscott (eds.), Dodrecht & Boston: D. Reidel
       Publishing Company, pp. 37–64.
     * Resnick, J., R. Stickgold, C.D. Rittenhouse, and J.A. Hobson, 1994,
       “Self-Representation and Bizarreness in Children’s Dream Reports
       Collected in the Home Setting”, Consciousness and Cognition, 3:
       30–45.
     * Revonsuo, A., 2000, “The Reinterpretation of Dreams: An
       Evolutionary Hypothesis of the Function of Dreaming”, Behavioral
       and Brain Sciences, 23: 877–901.
     * –––, 2005, “The Self in Dreams”, in The Lost Self. Pathologies of
       the Brain and Identity, T.E. Feinberg and J.P. Keenan (eds.),
       Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 206–219.
     * –––, 2006, Inner Presence: Consciousness as a Biological
       Phenomenon, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT Press.
     * Revonsuo, A. and C. Salmivalli, 1995, “A Content Analysis of
       Bizarre Elements in Dreams”, Dreaming, 5:169–187.
     * Revonsuo, A. and K. Tarkko, 2002, “Binding in Dreams. The
       Bizarreness of Dream Images and the Unity of Consciousness”,
       Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9: 3–24.
     * Revonsuo, A., J. Tuominen, and K. Valli, 2015, “The Avatars in the
       Machine – Dreaming as a Simulation of Social Reality”, in T.
       Metzinger and J. M. Windt (eds.), Open MIND, Frankfurt am Main:
       MIND Group.
     * Rosen, M.G., 2013, “What I Make up when I Wake up: Anti-Experience
       Views and Narrative Fabrication of Dreams”, Frontiers in
       Psychology, 4, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00514 [available online]
     * –––, 2015, “I’m thinking your thoughts while I sleep: Sense of
       agency and ownership over dream thought”, Psychology of
       Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 2(3): 326–339.
     * –––, 2018a, “Enactive or inactive? Cranially envatted dream
       experience and the extended conscious mind”, Philosophical
       Explorations, 21(2): 295–318.
     * –––, 2018b, “How bizarre? A pluralist approach to dream content”,
       Consciousness and Cognition, 62: 148–162.
     * –––, forthcoming, “Dreaming of a stable world: vision and action in
       sleep”, first online 22 February 2019 Synthese,
       doi:10.1007/s11229-019-02149-1
     * Rosen, M.G. and J. Sutton, 2013, “Self-Representation and
       Perspectives in Dreams”, Philosophy Compass, 8(11): 1041–1053.
     * Russell, B., 1914, Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field
       for Scientific Method in Philosophy, London & New York: Routledge
       (2009).
     * –––, 1948, Human Knowledge: It’s Scope and Limits, London & New
       York: Routledge (2009).
     * Ryle, G., 1949, The Concept of Mind, Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 2000.
     * Sartre, J.-P., 1940, L’imaginaire: Psychologie phénoménologique de
       l’imagination, Paris: Gallimard, 2005.
     * Sauvageau, A., T.A. Nielsen, and J. Montplaisir, 1998, “Effects of
       Somatosensory Stimulation on Dream Content in Gymnasts and Control
       Participants: Evidence of Vestibulomotor Adaptation in REM Sleep”,
       Dreaming, 8: 125–134.
     * Scarone, S., M.L. Manzone, O. Gambini, I. Kantzas, I. Limosani, A.
       D’Agostino, and J.A. Hobson, 2007, “The Dream as a Model for
       Psychosis: An Experimental Approach Using Bizarreness as a
       Cognitive Marker”, Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(3): 515–522.
     * Schenck, C.H. 2005, Paradox Lost: Midnight in the Battleground of
       Sleep and Dreams, Minneapolis: Extreme Nights, LLC.
     * Schenck, C.H. and M.W. Mahowald, 1996, “REM Sleep Parasomnias”,
       Neurological Clinics, 14: 697–720.
     * Scherner, K.A., 1861, Das Leben des Traumes, Berlin: Verlag von
       Heinrich Schindler.
     * Schooler, J.W., J. Smallwood, K. Christoff, T.C. Handy, E.D.
       Reichle, and M.A. Sayette, 2011, “Meta-awareness, Perceptual
       Decoupling and the Wandering Mind”, Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
       15(7): 319–326.
     * Schopenhauer, A., 1847, Kleinere Schriften, Zürich: Haffmans Verlag
       (1988).
     * Schredl, M., 2006, “Factors Affecting the Continuity between Waking
       and Dreaming: Emotional Intensity and Emotional Tone of the
       Waking-Life Event”, Sleep and Hypnosis, 8: 1–5.
     * –––, 2010, “History of Dream Research: The Dissertation ‘Entstehung
       der Träume (Origin of Dreams)’ of Wilhelm Weygandt Published in
       1893”, International Journal of Dream Research, 3(1): 95–97.
     * Schredl, M. and F. Hofmann, 2003, “Continuity between Waking
       Activities and Dream Activities”, Consciousness and Cognition, 12:
       298–308.
     * Schredl, M., A. Fuchedzhieva, H. Hämig, and V. Schindele, 2008, “Do
       We Think Dreams Are in Black and White Due to Memory Problems?”,
       Dreaming, 18(3): 175–180.
     * Schröder, S., 1997, “The Concept of Dreaming: On Three Theses by
       Malcolm”, Philosophical Investigations, 20(1): 15–38.
     * Schwitzgebel, E., 2002, “Why Did We Think We Dreamed in Black and
       White?”, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 33: 649–660.
     * –––, 2003, “Do People Still Report Dreaming in Black and White? An
       Attempt to Replicate a Questionnaire from 1942”, Perceptual and
       Motor Skills, 96: 25–29.
     * –––, 2011, Perplexities of Consciousness, Cambridge & London: MIT
       Press.
     * –––, 2017, “1% Skepticism”, Noûs, 51(2): 271–290.
     * Schwitzgebel, E., C. Huang, and Y. Zhou, 2006, “Do We Dream in
       Color? Cultural Variations and Skepticism”, Dreaming, 16(1): 36–42.
     * Searle, J., 2000, “Consciousness”, Annual Review of Neuroscience,
       23: 557–578.
     * Sebastián, M., 2014a, “Dreams: An Empirical Way to Settle the
       Discussion between Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Theories of
       Consciousness”, Synthese, 191(2): 263–285.
     * –––, 2014b, “Not a HOT dream”, In Consciousness inside and out:
       Phenomenology, neuroscience, and the nature of experience,
       Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 415–432.
     * Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism, R.G. Bury (ed.),
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (1987).
     * Siclari, F., and G. Tononi, 2017, “Local aspects of sleep and
       wakefulness”, Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 44: 222–227.
     * Siclari, F., J. LaRocque, B. Postle, and G. Tononi, 2013,
       “Assessing sleep consciousness within subjects using a serial
       awakening paradigm”, Frontiers in psychology, 4,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00542
     * Siclari, F., B. Baird, L. Perogamvros, G. Bernardi, J. LaRocque, B.
       Riedner, M. Boly, B. Postle, and G. Tononi, 2017, “The neural
       correlates of dreaming”, Nature Neuroscience, 20(6): 872.
     * Siegler, F.A., 1967, “Remembering Dreams”, The Philosophical
       Quarterly, 17: 14–24.
     * Silberer, H., 1919, Der Traum: Einführung in die Traumpsychologie,
       Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke.
     * Singer, E.A., 1924, “On Pain in Dreams”, The Journal of Philosophy,
       21(22): 589–601.
     * Smallwood, J. and J.W. Schooler, 2015, “The science of mind
       wandering: empirically navigating the stream of consciousness”,
       Annual review of psychology, 66: 487–518.
     * Smith, A.D., 2002, The Problem of Perception, Cambridge, Mass.:
       Harvard University Press.
     * Solms, M., 1997, The Neuropsychology of Dreams: A
       Clinico-Anatomical Study, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
     * –––, 2000, “Dreaming and REM Sleep Are Controlled by Different
       Brain Mechanisms”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23: 843–850.
     * Sosa, E., 2007, A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective
       Knowledge, Volume I, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
     * Soteriou, M., forthcoming, “Dreams, agency, and judgement”,
       Synthese, first online 20 July 2017, doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1496-7
     * Springett, B., 2019, “Can we know about the evolution of
       dreaming?”, Dreaming, 29(3): 220.
     * Stickgold, R. and M.P. Walker (eds.), 2009, The Neuroscience of
       Sleep, London, Burlington MA, San Diego: Elsevier: Academic Press.
     * Stone, J., 1984, “Dreaming and Certainty”, Philosophical Studies,
       45(May): 353–368.
     * Stroud, B., 1984, The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism,
       Oxford: Clarendon Press.
     * Stumbrys, T., D. Erlacher, and M. Schredl, 2013, “Testing the
       involvement of the prefrontal cortex in lucid dreaming: a tDCS
       study”, Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4): 1214–1222.
     * Stumbrys, T., D. Erlacher, M. Johnson, and M. Schredl, M., 2014,
       “The Phenomenology of Lucid Dreaming: An Online Survey”, American
       Journal of Psychology, 127(2): 191–204.
     * Symons, D., 1993, “The Stuff that Dreams Aren’t Made of: Why
       Wake-State and Dream-State Sensory Experiences Differ”, Cognition,
       47(3): 181–217.
     * Thomas, N., 2014, “The multidimensional spectrum of imagination:
       Images, dreams, hallucinations, and active, imaginative
       perception”, Humanities 3(2): 132–184.
     * Thompson, E., 2014, Waking, dreaming, being: Self and consciousness
       in neuroscience, meditation, and philosophy, New York: Columbia
       University Press.
     * –––, 2015, “Dreamless Sleep, the Embodied Mind, and Consciousness –
       The Relevance of a Classical Indian Debate to Cognitive Science”,
       in T. Metzinger and J. M. Windt (eds.), Open MIND, Frankfurt am
       Main: MIND Group.
     * Tononi, G., 2008, “Consciousness as integrated information: a
       provisional manifesto”, Biological Bulletin, 215: 216–242.
     * Uslar, D. von, 1964, Der Traum als Welt: Untersuchungen zur
       Ontologie und Phänomenologie des Traums, Pfullingen: Neske.
     * Valberg, J.J., 2007, Dream, Death, and the Self, Princeton &
       Oxford: Princeton University Press.
     * Valli, K., 2008, Threat Simulation: The Function of Dreaming?,
       doctoral thesis, Turku: Annales Universitatis Turkuensis.
     * van de Castle, R.L., 1994, Our Dreaming Mind, New York: Ballantine
       Books.
     * van Eeden, F., 1913, “A Study of Dreams”, Proceedings of the
       Society for Psychical Research, 26: 431–461.
     * Vold, J.M., 1910/1912, Über den Traum, Vol. I and II, edited by O.
       Klemm, Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth.
     * Voss, U., R. Holzmann, I. Tuin, and J.A. Hobson, 2009, “Lucid
       Dreaming: A State of Consciousness with Features of Both Waking and
       Non-Lucid Dreaming”, Sleep, 32(9): 1191–1200.
     * Voss, U., K. Schermelleh-Engel, J. Windt, C. Frenzel, and A.
       Hobson, 2013, “Measuring consciousness in dreams: the lucidity and
       consciousness in dreams scale”, Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1):
       8–21.
     * Voss, U. and A. Hobson, 2015, “What is the state-of-the-art on
       lucid dreaming? – Recent advances and questions for future
       research”, in T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (eds.), Open MIND,
       Frankfurt a. MIND Group.
     * Voss, U., R. Holzmann, A. Hobson, W. Paulus, J. Koppehele-Gossel,
       A. Klimke, and M. Nitsche, 2014, “Induction of self awareness in
       dreams through frontal low current stimulation of gamma activity”,
       Nature Neuroscience, 17(6): 810.
     * Walker, M.P., 2009, “Sleep-Dependent Memory Processing”, in
       Stickgold and Walker 2009: 230–240.
     * Wamsley, E.J., 2013, “Dreaming, Waking Conscious Experience, and
       the Resting Brain: Report of Subjective Experience as a Tool in the
       Cognitive Neurosciences”, Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
       doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00637 [available online]
     * Wamsley, E.J. and R. Stickgold, 2009, “Incorporation of Waking
       Events into Dreams”, in Stickgold and Walker 2009: 330–336.
     * –––, 2010, “Dreaming and Offline Memory Processing”, Current
       Biology, 20(23): R1010–1013.
     * Wamsley, E.J., M. Tucker, J.D. Payne, J.A. Benavides, and R.
       Stickgold, 2010, “Dreaming of a Learning Task Is Associated with
       Enhanced Sleep-Dependent Memory Consolidation”, Current Biology,
       20(9): 850–855.
     * Wamsley, E., C. Donjacour, T. Scammell, G. Lammers, and R.
       Stickgold, 2014, “Delusional confusion of dreaming and reality in
       narcolepsy”, Sleep, 37(2): 419–422.
     * Waxman, W., 1994, Hume’s Theory of Consciousness, Cambridge & New
       York: Cambridge University Press.
     * Weygandt, W., 1893, Entstehung der Träume, Leipzig: Grübel &
       Sommerlatte.
     * Williams, B., 1978, Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry,
       Middlesex: Pelican Books.
     * Windt, J.M., 2010, “The Immersive Spatiotemporal Hallucination
       Model of Dreaming”, Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9:
       295–316.
     * –––, 2011, “Altered Consciousness in Philosophy”, in Altering
       Consciousness. Multidisciplinary Perspectives, Volume 1: History,
       Culture, and the Humanities, E. Cardeña and M. Winkelman (eds.),
       Santa Barbera, Denver & Oxford: Praeger, pp. 229–254.
     * –––, 2013, “Reporting Dream Experience: Why (Not) to Be Skeptical
       about Dream Reports”, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7,
       doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00708 [available online]
     * –––, 2015a, Dreaming: A Conceptual Framework for Philosophy of Mind
       and Empirical Research. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
     * –––, 2015b, “Just in time – dreamless sleep experience as pure
       subjective temporality”, in T. Metzinger & J.M. Windt (eds.), Open
       MIND, Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
     * –––, 2018, “Predictive brains, dreaming selves, sleeping bodies:
       how the analysis of dream movement can inform a theory of self-and
       world-simulation in dreams”, Synthese, 195(6): 2577–2625.
     * Windt, J.M. and T. Metzinger, 2007, “The Philosophy of Dreaming and
       Self-Consciousness: What Happens to the Experiential Subject during
       the Dream State?”, in Barrett and McNamara 2007c: 193–248.
     * Windt, J.M. and V. Noreika, 2011, “How to Integrate Dreaming into a
       General Theory of Consciousness—A Critical Review of Existing
       Positions and Suggestions for Future Research”, Consciousness and
       Cognition, 20(4): 1091–1107.
     * Windt, J.M., and U. Voss, 2018, “Spontaneous thought, insight, and
       control in lucid dreams”, in The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous
       Thought: Mind-Wandering, Creativity, and Dreaming, Oxford: Oxford
       University Press, pp. 385–410.
     * Windt, J.M., T. Nielsen, and E. Thompson, 2016, “Does consciousness
       disappear in dreamless sleep?”, Trends in cognitive sciences,
       20(12): 871–882.
     * Wittgenstein, L., 1953, Philosophical Investigations, G.E.M.
       Anscombe (ed.), Oxford: Blackwell.
     * –––, 1967, Zettel, G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (eds.),
       Berkeley: University of California Press.
     * Wundt, W.M., 1896, Grundriss der Psychologie, Leipzig: Engelman;
       page reference is to the excerpt translated by C.H. Judd, reprinted
       in R.L. Woods and H.B. Greenhouse (eds.), The New World of Dreams,
       New York: Macmilllan (1974), pp. 179–180.
     * Zeidman, P., and E. Maguire, 2016, “Anterior hippocampus: the
       anatomy of perception, imagination and episodic memory”, Nature
       Reviews Neuroscience, 17(3): 173.

Academic Tools

   sep man icon How to cite this entry.
   sep man icon Preview the PDF version of this entry at the Friends of
   the SEP Society.
   inpho icon Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry at the
   Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
   phil papers icon Enhanced bibliography for this entry at PhilPapers,
   with links to its database.

Other Internet Resources

     * Philosophy of Dreaming, entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of
       Philosophy.
     * Dreams, PhilPapers collection.
     * Dreams and Skepticism, PhilPapers collection.

Related Entries

   belief | Berkeley, George | delusion | Descartes, René: epistemology |
   imagination | Locke, John | perception: the problem of | personal
   identity | personal identity: and ethics | Plato: on knowledge in the
   Theaetetus | sense data | skepticism | skepticism: and content
   externalism

Acknowledgments

   I want to thank Regina Fabry and two anonymous reviewers for helpful
   comments and constructive criticism on an earlier version of this
   manuscript. And as always, I am greatly indebted to Stefan Pitz for his
   support.

   Copyright © 2019 by
   Jennifer M. Windt <jennifer.windt@monash.edu>
   Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding
   initiative.
   The Encyclopedia Now Needs Your Support
   Please Read How You Can Help Keep the Encyclopedia Free

Browse

     * Table of Contents
     * What's New
     * Random Entry
     * Chronological
     * Archives

About

     * Editorial Information
     * About the SEP
     * Editorial Board
     * How to Cite the SEP
     * Special Characters
     * Advanced Tools
     * Accessibility
     * Contact

Support SEP

     * Support the SEP
     * PDFs for SEP Friends
     * Make a Donation
     * SEPIA for Libraries

Mirror Sites

   View this site from another server:
   USA (Main Site) Philosophy, Stanford University
     * Info about mirror sites

   The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy is copyright © 2023 by The
   Metaphysics Research Lab, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University

   Library of Congress Catalog Data: ISSN 1095-5054
