   #The Millions » On Dreams and Literature Comments Feed JSON oEmbed
   (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

   (BUTTON) The Millions
   ____________________

     * Essays
     * Reviews
     * Q&A
     * Previews
     * YIR
     * |
     * About Us
     * Support Us
     * Twitter

On Dreams and Literature

   [pexels-erik-mclean-57533692.jpg]
   Essays
   Ed Simon December 28, 2020 | 17 min read

   “We are such stuff/As dreams are made on, and our little life/Is
   rounded with a sleep.”
   — William Shakespeare, The Tempest (1611)

   “A candy-colored clown they call the sandman/tiptoes to my room every
   night/just to sprinkle stardust and to whisper/’Go to sleep, everything
   is alright.’”
   — Roy Orbison, “In Dreams” (1963)

   cover Amongst the green-dappled Malvern Hills, where sunlight spools
   onto spring leaves like puddles of water in autumn, a peasant named
   Will is imagined to have fallen asleep on a May day when both the
   warmth and the light induce dreams. Sometime in the late
   fourteenth-century (as near as we can tell between 1370 and 1390), the
   poet William Langland wrote of a character in Piers Plowman who shared
   his name and happened to fall asleep. “In a summer season,” Langland
   begins, “when soft was the sun, /I clothed myself in a cloak as I
   shepherd were… And went wide in the world wonders to hear.” Presentism
   is a critical vice, a fallacy of misreading yourself into a work,
   supposedly especially perilous if it’s one that’s nearly seven
   centuries old. Hard not to commit that sin sometimes. “But on a May
   morning,” Langland writes, and I note his words those seven centuries
   later on a May afternoon, when the sun is similarly soft, and the
   inevitable drowsiness of warm contentment takes over my own nodding
   head and drowsy eyes so that I can’t help but see myself in the opening
   stanza of Piers Plowman.

   “A marvel befell me of fairy, methought./I was weary with wandering and
   went me to rest/Under a broad bank by a brook’s side,/And as I lay and
   leaned over and looked into the water/I fell into a sleep for it
   sounded so merry.” Good close readers that we are all supposed to be,
   it’s imperative that we don’t read into the poem things that aren’t
   actually in it, and yet I can’t help but imagine what that daytime
   nocturn was like. The soft gurgle of a creek through English fields,
   the feeling of damp grass underneath dirtied hands, and of scratchy
   cloak against unwashed skin; the sunlight tanning the backs of his
   eyelids; that dull, corpuscular red of daytime sleep, the warmth of
   day’s glow flushing his cheeks, and the almost preternatural quiet save
   for some bird chirping. The sort of sleep you fall into when you’re on
   a train that rocks you to sleep in the sunlight of late afternoon. It
   sounds nice.

   cover Piers Plowman is of a medieval poetic genre known as a dream
   allegory, or even more enticingly as a dream vision. Most famous of
   these is Dante Alighieri’s The Divine Comedy, where its central
   character (who as in Piers Plowman shares the poet’s name) discovers
   himself in a less pleasant wood than does Will, for that “When I had
   journeyed half of our life’s way,/I found myself within a shadowed
   forest,/for I had lost the path that does not stray.” The Middle Ages
   didn’t originate the dream vision, but it was the golden age of the
   form, where poets could express mystical truths in journeys that only
   happened within heads resting upon rough, straw-stuffed pillows.
   Langland’s century alone saw Geoffrey Chaucer’s Parliament of Fowls,
   John Gower’s Vox Clamantis, John Lydgate’s The Temple of Glass, and the
   anonymously written Pearl (by the same lady or gent who wrote Sir
   Gawain and the Green Knight). Those are only English examples (or I
   should say examples by the English; Gower was writing in Latin), for
   the form was popular in France and Italy as well. A.C. Spearing
   explains in Medieval Dream-Poetry that while sleeping “we undergo
   experiences in which we are freed from the constraints of everyday
   possibility, and which we feel to have some hidden significance,” a
   sentiment which motivated the poetry of Langland and Dante.

   Dante famously claimed that his visions — of perdition, purgatory, and
   paradise — were not dreams, and yet everything in The Divine Comedy
   holds to the genre’s conventions. Both Langland and Dante engage the
   strange logic of the nocturne, the way in which the subconscious seems
   to rearrange and illuminate reality in a manner that the prosaicness of
   overrated wakefulness simply cannot. Dante writes that the “night hides
   things from us,” but his epic is itself proof that the night can just
   as often reveal things. Within The Divine Comedy Dante is guided
   through the nine circles of hell by the Roman poet Virgil, from the
   antechamber of the inferno wherein dwell the righteous pagans and
   classical philosophers, down through the frozen environs of the lowest
   domain whereby Lucifer forever torments and is tormented by that
   trinity of traitors composed of Cassius, Brutus, and Judas. Along the
   way Dante is privy to any number of nightmares, from self-disemboweling
   prophets to lovers forever buffeted around on violent winds (bearing no
   similarity to a gentle Malvern breeze). In the Purgatorio and Paradiso
   he is spectator to far more pleasant scenes (though telling that more
   people have read Inferno, as our nightmares are always easiest to
   remember), whereby he sees a heaven that’s the “color that paints the
   morning and evening clouds that face the sun,” almost a description of
   the peacefulness of accidentally nodding off on an early summer day.

   Both The Divine Comedy and Piers Plowman express verities accessed by
   the mind in repose; Langland’s poem, for not beginning in a dark wood
   but rather in a sunny field, embodies mystical apprehensions as surely
   as does Dante. A key difference is that Langland’s allegory is so
   obvious (as anyone who has seen the medieval play Everyman can attest
   is true of the period). Characters named after the Seven Deadly Sins,
   or called Patience, Clergy, and Scripture (and Old Age, Death, and
   Pestilence) all interact with Will — whose name has its own obvious
   implications. By contrast, Dante’s characters bear a resemblance to
   actual people (or they are actual people, from Aristotle in Limbo to
   Thomas Aquinas in Heaven), even while the events depicted are seemingly
   more fantastic (though in Piers Plowman Will witness both the fall of
   man and the harrowing of hell). Both are, however, written in the
   substance of dreams. Forget the didactic obviousness of allegory, the
   literal cipher that defines that form, and believe that in a field
   between Worcestershire and Hertfordshire Will did plumb the mysteries
   of eternity while sleeping. What makes the dream vision a chimerical
   form is that maybe he did. That’s the thing with dreams and their
   visions; there is no need to suspend disbelief. We’re not in the realm
   of fantasy or myth, for in dreams order has been abolished, anything is
   possible, and nothing is prohibited, not even flouting the arid rules
   of logic.

   A danger to this, for to dream is to court the absolute when we’re at
   our most vulnerable, to find eternity in a sleep. Piers Plowman had the
   taint of heresy about it, as it inspired the revolutionaries of 1381’s
   Peasant Rebellion, as well as the adherents of a schismatic group of
   proto-Protestants known as Lollards. Arguably the crushing of the
   rebellion led to an attendant attack by authorities on vernacular
   literature like Piers Plowman, in part explaining the general
   dismalness of English literature in the fifteenth-century (which
   excluding Mallory and Skelton is the worst century of writing).
   Scholars have long debated the relationship between Langland and
   Lollardy, but we’ll let others more informed tease out those
   connections[. T]he larger point is that dreaming can get you in
   trouble. That’s because dreaming is the only realm in which we’re
   simultaneously complete sovereign and lowly subject; the cinema we
   watch when our eyes are closed. Sleep is a domain that can’t be reached
   by monarch, tyrant, state, or corporation — it is our realm.

   cover Dreams had a radical import in George Orwell’s dystopian classic
   1984. You’ll recall that in that novel the main character of Winston
   Smith is a minor bureaucrat in totalitarian Oceania. Every aspect of
   Smith’s life is carefully controlled; his life is under total
   surveillance, all speech is regulated (or made redundant by New Speak),
   and even the truth is censored, altered, and transformed (which the
   character himself has a role in). Yet his dreams are one aspect of his
   life which the government can’t quite control, for Smith “had dreamed
   that he was walking through a pitch-dark room. And someone sitting to
   one side of him had said as he passed: ‘We shall meet in the place
   where there is no darkness.’” Sleep is an anarchic space where the
   dreamer is at the whims of something much larger and more powerful than
   themselves, and by contrast where sometimes the dreamer finds
   themselves transformed into a god. A warning here though — when total
   independence erupts from our skulls into the wider world (for after
   all, it is common to mutter in one’s sleep) there is the potential that
   your unconsciousness can betray you. Smith, after all, is always
   monitored by his telescreen.

   Whether it’s the thirteenth or the twenty-first centuries, dreaming
   remains bizarre. Whether we reduce dreams to messages from the gods and
   the dead, or repressed memories and neurosis playing in the nursery of
   our unconscious, or simply random electric flickering of neurons, the
   fact that we spend long stretches of our life submerging ourselves in
   bizarre parallel dimensions is so odd that I can’t help but wonder why
   we don’t talk about it more (beyond painful conversations recounting
   dreams). So strange is it that we spend a third of our lives journeying
   to fantastic realms where every law of spatiality and temporality and
   every axiom of identity and principle of logic is flouted, that you’d
   think we’d conduct ourselves with a bit more humility when dismissing
   that which seems fantastic in the experience of those from generations
   past who’ve long since gone to eternal sleep. Which is just to wonder
   that when William Langland dreamt, is it possible that he dreamt of me?

   Even with our advancements in the modern scientific study of the
   phenomenon, their mysteriousness hasn’t entirely dissipated. If our
   ancestors saw in dreams portents and prophecies, then this oracular
   aspect was only extended by Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation of
   Dreams. He who inaugurated the nascent field of psychoanalysis
   explained dreams as a complex tapestry of wish fulfillment and
   sublimation, an encoded narrative that mapped onto the patient’s waking
   life and that could be deciphered by the trained therapist. Freud
   writes that there “exists a psychological technique by which dreams may
   be interpreted and that upon the application of this method every dream
   will show itself to be a senseful psychological structure which may be
   introduced into an assignable place in the psychic activity of the
   waking state.” Not so different from Will sleeping in his field. The
   origin may be different — Langland sees in dreams visions imparted from
   God and Freud finds their origin in the holy unconsciousness, but the
   idea isn’t dissimilar. Dreaming imparts an ordered and ultimately
   comprehensible message, even though the imagery may be cryptic.

   Freud has been left to us literary critics (who’ve even grown tired of
   him over the past generation), and science has abandoned terms like id,
   ego, and superego in favor of neurons and biochemistry, synapses and
   serotonin. For neurologists, dreaming is a function of the prefrontal
   cortex powering down during REM sleep, and of the hippocampus severing
   its waking relationship with the neocortex, allowing for a bit of a
   free-for-all in the brain. Scientists have discovered much about how
   and why dreaming happens — what parts of the brain are involved, what
   cycles of wakefulness and restfulness a person will experience, when
   dreaming evolved, and what functions (if any) it could possibly serve.
   Gone are the simple reductionisms of dream interpretation manuals with
   their categorized entries about your teeth falling out or of showing up
   naked to your high school biology final. Neuroscientists favor a more
   sober view of dreaming, whereby random bits of imagery and thought
   thrown out by your groggy chemical induced brain rearrange themselves
   into a narrative which isn’t really a narrative. Still, as Andrea Rock
   notes in The Mind at Night: The New Science of How and Why we Dream,
   “it’s impossible for scientists to agree on something as seemingly
   simple as the definition of dreaming.” If we’re such stuff as dreams
   are made of, the forensics remain inconclusive.
   Get the best of The Millions in your inbox each week! Subscribe for
   free.
   ____________________ Subscribe

   [X] Yes Please [ ] [ ]

   ____________________

   cover Not that dreaming is exclusively a human activity. Scientists
   have been able to demonstrate that all mammals have some form of
   nocturnal hallucination, from gorillas to duck-billed platypuses,
   dolphins to hamsters. Anyone with a dog has seen their friend fall into
   a deep reverie; their legs pump as if they’re running, occasionally
   they’ll even startle-bark themselves awake. One summer day my wife and
   I entertained our French bulldog by having her chase a sprinkler’s
   spray. She flapped her jowly face at the cool gush of water with a
   happiness that no human is capable of. That evening, while she was
   asleep, she began to flap her mouth again, finally settling into a
   deeper reverie where she just smiled. Dreaming may not necessarily be a
   mammalian affair — there are indications that both birds and reptiles
   dream — albeit it’s harder to study creatures more distant from us.
   Regardless, evidence is that animals have been sleeping perchance to
   dream for a very long time, as it turns out. Rock writes that “Because
   the more common forms of mammals we see today branched off from the
   monotreme line about 140 million years ago… REM sleep as it exists in
   most animals also emerged at about the time that split occurred.” We
   don’t know if dinosaurs dreamt, but something skittering around and out
   of the way of their feet certainly did.

   cover If animal brains are capable of generating pyrotechnic missives,
   and if dreaming goes back to the Cretaceous, what then of the future of
   dreaming? If dogs and donkeys, cats and camels are capable of dreaming,
   will artificial intelligences dream? This is the question asked by
   Philip K. Dick‘s Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, which was itself
   the source material for Ridley Scott’s science fiction film classic
   Blade Runner. Dick was an author as obsessed with illusion and reality,
   the unattainability of truth, and doubt as much as any writer since
   Plato.[DEL: :DEL] In his novel’s account of the bounty hunter Rick
   Deckard’s decommissioning of sentient androids, there is his usual
   examination of what defines consciousness, and the ways in which its
   illusions can present realities. “Everything is true… Everything
   anybody has ever thought,” one character says, a pithy encapsulation of
   the radical potential of dreams. Dick imagined robots capable of
   dreaming with such verisimilitude that they misapprehended themselves
   to be human, but as it turns out our digital tools are able to slumber
   in silicon.

   Computer scientists at Google have investigated what random images are
   produced by a complex artificial neural network as it “dreams,”
   allowing the devices to filter various images they’ve encountered and
   to recombine, recontextualize, and regenerate new pictures. In The
   Atlantic, Adrienne LaFrance writes that the “computer-made images
   feature scrolls of color, swirling lines, stretched faces, floating
   eyeballs, and uneasy waves of shadow and light. The machines seemed to
   be hallucinating, and in a way that appeared uncannily human.”
   Artificial Intelligence has improved to an unsettling degree in just
   the past decade, even though a constructed mind capable of easily
   passing the Turing Test has yet to be created, though that seems more
   an issue of time than possibility. If all of the flotsam and jetsam of
   the internet could coalesce into a collective consciousness emerging
   from the digital primordial like some archaic demigod birthing Herself
   from chaos, what dreams could be generated therein? Or if it’s possible
   to program a computer, a robot, an android, an automaton to dream, then
   what oracles of Artificial Intelligence could be birthed? I can’t help
   but thrill to the idea that we’ll be able to program a desktop version
   of the Delphic Oracle analyzing its own microchipped dreams. “The
   electric things have their life too,” Dick wrote.

   We’ve already developed AI capable of generating completely
   realistic-looking but totally fictional women and men. Software
   engineer Philip Wang invented a program at ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com
   which does exactly what its title advertises itself as doing: it gives
   you a picture of a person who doesn’t exist. Using an algorithm that
   combs through actual images, Wang’s site uses something called a
   generative adversarial network to create pictures of people who never
   lived. If you refresh the site, you’ll see that the humans dreamt of by
   the neural network aren’t cartoons or caricatures, but photorealistic
   images so accurate that they look like they could be used for a
   passport. So far I’ve been presented with an attractive butch woman
   with sparkling brown eyes, a broad smile, and short curly auburn hair;
   a strong jawed man in his 30s with an unfortunate bowl cut and a day’s
   worth of stubble who looks a bit like swimmer Michael Phelps; and a
   nerdy-looking Asian man with a pleasant smile and horn-rimmed glasses.
   Every single person the AI presented looked completely average and
   real, so that if I encountered them in the grocery store or at
   Starbucks I wouldn’t think twice, and yet not a single one of them was
   real. I’d read once (though I can’t remember where) that every invented
   person we encounter in our dreams has a corollary to somebody that we
   once met briefly in real life, a waitress or a store clerk whose paths
   we crossed for a few minutes drudged up from the unconscious and
   commissioned into our narrative. I now think that all of those people
   come from ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com.

   One fictional person who reoccurs in many of our dreams is “This Man,”
   a pudgy, unattractive balding man with thick eyebrows, and an
   approachable smile who was the subject of Italian marketer Andrea
   Natella’s now defunct website “Ever Dream This Man?” According to
   Natella, scores of people had dreams about the man (occasionally
   nightmares) across all continents and in dozens of countries. Blake
   Butler, writing in Vice Magazine, explains that “His presence seems
   both menacing and foreboding at the same time, unclear in purpose, but
   haunting to those in whom he does appear.” This Man doesn’t
   particularly look like any famous figure, nor is he so generic that his
   presence can be dismissed as mere coincidence. A spooky resonance
   concerns this guy who looks like he manages a diner on First Avenue and
   65^th emerging simultaneously in thousands of peoples’ dreams (his
   cameo is far less creepy after you’re aware of the website). Multiple
   hypotheses were proffered, ranging from This Man being the product of
   the collective unconscious as described by Carl Jung to Him being a
   manifestation of God appearing to people from Seattle to Shanghai (my
   preferred theory). As it turns out, he was simply the result of a viral
   marketing campaign.

   Meme campaigns aside, the sheer weirdness of dreams can’t quite
   exorcize them of a supernatural import — we’re all looking for
   portents, predictions, and prophecies. Being submerged into what’s
   effectively another universe can’t help but alter our sense of reality,
   or at least make us question what exactly that word means. For years
   now I’ve had dreams that take place in the same recurring location — a
   detailed, complex, baroque alternate version of my hometown of
   Pittsburgh. This parallel universe Pittsburgh roughly maps onto the
   actual place, though it appears much larger and there are notable
   differences. Downtown, for example, is a network of towering,
   interconnected skyscrapers all accessible from within one another
   (there’s a good bookstore there); a portion of Squirrel Hill is given
   over to a Wild West experience set. It’s not that I have the same
   dreams about this place, it’s that the place is the same, regardless of
   what happens to me in those dreams when I’m there. So much so that I
   experience the uncanny feeling of not dreaming, but rather of sliding
   into some other dimension. An eerie feeling comes to me from a life
   closer then my own breath, existing somewhere in the space between
   atoms, and yet totally invisible to my conscious eye.

   Such is the realm of seers and shamans, poets and prophets, as well as
   no doubt yourself — the dream realm is accessible to everyone. As
   internal messages from a universe hidden within, whereby the muse and
   oracle are within your own skull. Long have serendipitous missives
   arisen from our slumber, even while we debate their ultimate origin.
   Social activist Julia Ward Howe wrote “Battle Hymn of the Republic”
   when staying at Washington D.C.’s Ward Hotel in 1861, the “dirtiest,
   dustiest filthiest place I ever saw.” While “in a half dreaming state”
   she heard a group of Union soldiers marching down Pennsylvania Avenue
   singing “John Brown’s Body,” and based on that song Howe composed her
   own hymn while in a reverie. Howe’s dreaming was in keeping with a
   melancholic era enraptured to spiritualism and occultism, for she
   commonly was imparted with “attacks of versification [that] had visited
   me in the night.” The apocalyptic Civil War altered peoples’ dreams, it
   would seem. Jonathan White explores the sleep-world of
   nineteenth-century Americans in his unusual and exhaustive study
   Midnight in America: Darkness, Sleep, and Dreams During the Civil War,
   arguing that peoples’ “dream reports were often remarkably raw and
   unfiltered… vividly bringing to life the horrors of the conflict; for
   others, nighttime was an escape from the hard realities of life and
   death in wartime.”

   Every era imparts its own images, symbols, and themes into dreams, so
   that collective analysis can tell us about the concerns of any given
   era. White writes that during the Civil War people used dreams to
   relive “distant memories or horrific experiences in battle, longing for
   a return to peace and life as they had known it before the war, kissing
   loved ones that had not seen for years, communing with the dead,
   traveling to faraway places they wished they could see in real life,”
   which even if the particulars may be different, is not so altered from
   our current reposes. One of the most famous of Civil War dreamers was
   Abraham Lincoln, whose own morbid visions were in keeping with
   slumber’s prophetic purposes. Only days before his assassination,
   Lincoln recounted to his bodyguard that he’d had an eerily realistic
   dream in which he wandered from room to room in the White House. “I
   heard subdued sobs,” Lincoln said, as “if a number of people were
   weeping.” The president was disturbed by the sound of mourning, “so
   mysterious and so shocking,” until he arrived in the East Room. “Before
   me was a catafalque, on which rested a corpse wrapped in funeral
   vestments,” the body inside being that of Lincoln. Such dreams are
   significant — as the disquieting quarantine visions people have had
   over the past two months can attest to. We should listen — they have
   something to tell us.

   cover Within literature dreams seem to always have something to say, a
   realm of the fantastic visited in novels as diverse as L. Frank Baum’s
   Wizard of Oz, Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol, Neil Gaiman’s
   Sandman, and Lewis Carol’s Alice in Wonderland. The dream kingdom is a
   place where the laws of physics are muted, where logic and reason no
   longer hold domain, and the wild kings of absurdity are allowed to
   reign triumphant. Those aforementioned novels are ones in which
   characters like Dorothy, Ebenezer Scrooge, Morpheus, and Alice are
   subsumed into a fantastical dream realm, but there are plenty of books
   with more prosaic dream sequences, from Mr. Lockwood’s harrowing
   nightmare in Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights to Raskolnikov’s violent
   childhood dreams in Fyodor Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment. “I’ve
   dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me ever after, and
   changed my ideas,” writes Brontë, “they’ve gone through and through me,
   like wine through water, and altered the color of my mind.” Then there
   is the literature that emerges from dreams, the half-remembered
   snippets and surreal plot lines, the riffs of dialogue and the turns of
   phrase that are birthed from the baked brain of night. Think of the
   poppy reveries of Thomas DeQuincy’s Confessions of an English
   Opium-Eater or the delicious purpose of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s
   “Kubla Khan” written in a similar drug haze until the poet was
   interrupted by that damned person from Porlock.

   Spearing writes that “from the time of the Homeric poems down to the
   modern novel, it is surely true that the scene of the great bulk of
   Western literature has not been the internal world of the mind, in
   which dreams transact themselves, but the outer, public world of
   objective reality,” but this misses an important point. All novels
   actually occur in the internal world of the mind, no matter how
   vigorous their subjects may be. I’ll never be able to see the exact
   same cool colors of Jay Gatsby’s shirts that you envision, nor will I
   hear the exact timber of Mr. Darcy’s voice that you imagine, in the
   same way that no photographs or drawings or paintings can be brought
   back from the place you go to when you sleep. Dreaming and reading are
   unified in being activities of fully created, totally self-contained
   realities. Furthermore, there is a utopian freedom in this, for that
   closed off dimension, that pinched off universe which you travel to in
   reveries nocturnal or readerly is free of the contagion of the
   corrupted outside world. There are no pop-up ads in dreams, there are
   no telemarketers calling you. Even our nightmares are at least our own.
   Here, as in the novel, the person may be truly free.

   Dreaming is the substance of literature. It’s what comes before,
   during, and after writing and reading, and there can be no fiction or
   poetry without it. There is no activity in waking life more similar to
   dreaming than reading (and by proxy writing, which is just
   self-directed reading). All necessitate the complete creation of a
   totally constructed universe constrained within your own head and
   accessible only to the individual. The only difference between reading
   and dreaming is who directs the story. As in a book as in our slumber,
   the world which is entered is one that is singular to the
   dreamer/reader. What you see when you close your eyes is forever
   foreign to me, as I may never enter the exact same story-world that you
   do when you crack open a novel. “Life, what is it but a dream?” Carol
   astutely asks.

   We spend a third of our day in dream realms, which is why philosophers
   and poets have always rightly been preoccupied with them. Dreams
   necessarily make us question that border between waking and sleeping,
   truth and falsity, reality and illusion. That is the substance of
   storytelling as well, and that shared aspect between literature and
   dreaming is just as important as the oddity of existing for a spell in
   entirely closed off, totally self-invented, and completely free worlds.
   What unites the illusions of dreams and our complete ownership of them
   is subjectivity, and that is the charged medium through which
   literature must forever be conducted. Alfred North Whitehead once
   claimed that all of philosophy was mere footnotes to Plato — accurate
   to say that all of philosophy since then has been variations on the
   theme of kicking the tires of reality and questioning whether this
   exact moment is lived or dreamt.

   The pre-Socratic metaphysician Gorgias was a radical solipsist who
   thought that all the world was the dream of God and the dreamer was
   himself. Plato envisioned our waking life as but a pale shadow of a
   greater world of Forms. Rene Descartes in Meditations on First
   Philosophy forged a methodology of radical doubt, whereby he imagined
   that a malicious demon could potentially deceive him into thinking that
   the “sky, the air, the earth, colors, shapes, sounds and all external
   things are merely the delusions of dreams which he has devised to
   ensnare my judgment. I shall consider myself as not having hands or
   eyes, or flesh, or blood or senses, but as falsely believing that I
   have all these things.” So, from the assumption that everything is a
   dream, Descartes tried to latch onto anything that could be certain.
   Other than his own mind, he wasn’t able to find much. In dreams there
   is the beginning of metaphysics, for nothing else compels us to
   consider that the world which we see is not the world which there is,
   and yet such philosophical speculation need not philosophers, since
   children engage in it from the moment they can first think.

   When I was a little kid, I misunderstood that old nursery rhyme “Row
   Your Boat.” When it queried if “life is but a dream,” I took that
   literally to mean that all which we experience is illusion, specter,
   artifice. In my own abstract way I assumed that according to the song,
   all of this which we see: the sun and moon, the trees and flowers, our
   friends and family, are but a dream. And I wondered what it would be
   like when I woke up, who I would recount that marvelous dream too? “I
   had the strangest dream last night,” I imagined telling faces unknown
   with names unconveyed. I assumed the song meant that all of this, for
   all of us, was a dream — and who is to know what that world might look
   like when you wake up? Such a theme is explored in pop culture from the
   cyberpunk dystopia The Matrix to the sitcom finale Newhart, because
   this sense of unreality, of dreams impinging on our not-quite-real
   world is hard to shake. Writing about a classic metaphysical
   thought-experiment known as the Omphalos Argument (from the Greek for
   “navel,” as relating to a question of Eden), philosopher Bertrand
   Russell wrote in The Analysis of Mind that “There is no logical
   impossibility… that the world sprang into being five minutes ago,
   exactly as it then was, with a population that ‘remembered’ a wholly
   unreal past.” Perhaps we’ve just dozed off for a few minutes then?
   Here’s the thing though — even if all of this is a dream — it doesn’t
   matter. Because in dreams you’re innocent. In dreams you’re free.

   Image credit: Pexels/Erik Mclean.
   The Millions' future depends on your support. Become a member today.

   Ed Simon Ed Simon is a staff writer for Lit Hub, the editor of Belt
   Magazine, and the author of numerous books, including most recently
   Heaven, Hell and Paradise Lost; Elysium: A Visual History of
   Angelology; and Relic, part of the Object Lessons series. In the summer
   of 2024 Melville House will release his Devil's Contract: The History
   of the Faustian Bargain, the first comprehensive, popular account of
   that subject.

   Year in Reading
   [Screenshot-2025-12-19-at-11.08.40-AM.png]

A Year in Reading: 2025

   Year in Reading
   Editor December 22, 2025 | 17 min read
   ● ●

   Book Previews
   [Screenshot-2025-10-10-at-11.59.07-e1760548575101.png]

The Millions’ Great Fall 2025 Book Preview

   Book Previews
   Editor October 15, 2025 | 13 min read
   ● ●

   Book Previews
   [Screen-Shot-2025-07-07-at-1.58.51-PM.png]

The Millions’ Great Summer 2025 Book Preview

   Book Previews
   Editor July 8, 2025 | 16 min read
   ● ●

   Year in Reading
   [Screen-Shot-2024-12-02-at-1.59.16-PM.png]

A Year in Reading: 2024

   Year in Reading
   Editor December 3, 2024 | 3 min read
   ● ●

   Announcements

Meet the Winners of the 2025 Honey & Wax Book Collecting Prize

   Announcements
   Editor September 25, 2025 | 6 min read

   Book Previews
   [Screen-Shot-2025-04-08-at-12.01.16-PM.png]

The Great Spring 2025 Book Preview

   Book Previews
   Editor April 11, 2025 | 18 min read
   ● ●

   Reviews
   [Screen-Shot-2025-01-23-at-2.02.01-PM.png]

Esther Kinsky’s Lyrical Elegy for the Movies

   Reviews
   Marek Makowski January 30, 2025 | 4 min read
   ● ●

   Person to Person
   [Screen-Shot-2025-01-23-at-1.21.04-PM.png]

Madeleine Watts Doesn’t Want Closure

   Person to Person
   Marisa Wright January 29, 2025 | 5 min read
   ● ●

   Reviews
   [Screen-Shot-2025-01-23-at-1.40.09-PM.png]

John and Yves Berger’s Letters on the Nature of Art—and the Art of Nature

   Reviews
   Olga Zolotareva January 28, 2025 | 4 min read
   ● ●

   © PWxyz, LLC. All rights reserved.

   counter

   Quantcast
