   #V Magazine » Feed V Magazine » Comments Feed JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed
   (XML)

   Search
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Search

V158: I Dream Of Jennie

   Jennie’s fame didn’t dissolve her enigma. Instead, it gave her new
   tools to sculpt it

V158: I Dream Of Jennie

   Jennie’s fame didn’t dissolve her enigma. Instead, it gave her new
   tools to sculpt it

   December 31, 2025
     * Text by Mathias Rosenzweig

   On April 10th, 2012, South Korean pop culture giant YG Entertainment
   posted a cryptic photo to their official blog. In the image, a girl
   looks off-camera, dressed in a pink-and-white checkered shirt, with
   auburn streaks running through her black hair. Simply titled “WHO’S
   THAT GIRL???,” the breadcrumb was part of a teaser campaign for a
   forthcoming new girl group. One month later, a YouTube video with the
   same name appeared online—a one-minute, 36-second hypnotic clip of
   trainees dancing in the shadows, except for one girl, illuminated in a
   tight spotlight as she performs, her face too distant to capture, her
   dance movements too precise and charismatic to ignore. The video has
   since been viewed nearly twenty-four million times. Finally, on August
   29th of the same year, YG unveiled the girl in question: Jennie Kim
   (김제니), a sixteen-year-old trainee fluent in Korean, English, and
   Japanese. Fast forward 13 years, and Jennie is one of the most famous
   women in the world. Yet visibility is not the same as transparency;
   despite being everywhere, she remains, in some ways, just as elusive as
   that shadowed girl in the teaser. So, who is that girl with 89 million
   Instagram followers? It’s a mystery sustained not by secrecy, but by
   evolution—Jennie is always in motion, and always beginning again.
   Jennie wears jacket, silk bra, silk trunks, metal and glass earrings
   CHANEL | Bangle bracelets (black and white, right arm) DINOSAUR DESIGNS
   | Bangle bracelet (black, left arm) ALEXIS BITTAR | Vintage lucite
   bangle bracelet (red, left arm) THE ARCHIVE X YANA
   V158: GET THE MAGAZINE HERE

   “I can’t believe I’m still saying this,” Jennie begins over Zoom from
   Manila, Philippines, just days after our cover shoot in Los Angeles,
   “because it’s something I said a year ago before my first album [Ruby],
   but I feel like a baby stepping into the world.” That curiosity and
   wide-eyed wonder regarding her career’s possibilities remain a constant
   throughout our conversation—childlike, but never childish. Though she
   jokes, “You’re not allowed to say that!” when I mentioned her
   forthcoming thirtieth birthday, she speaks of the new decade with a
   spirit of inquiry rather than dread. “I just can’t wait for this new
   chapter of mine to open, not because I’m entering my 30s, but because
   there are just so many exciting things that I’ve planned ahead,” she
   explains. “I feel like I lived my 20s with passion and love.” She also
   lived them with a fastidious work ethic (BLACKPINK has sold over 20
   million records worldwide and was the first K-pop girl group to
   dominate charts in the West, with her aforementioned debut solo album
   debuting in the top 10 in 19 countries). “As far as I know, I’m going
   to be in Tokyo. I’m going to have a show the night of my birthday, and
   that whole week too,” she says—a fitting celebration for someone whose
   dedication borders on superhuman.
   Jennie wears jacket, silk bra, silk trunks, metal and glass earrings
   CHANEL | Bangle bracelets (black and white, right arm) DINOSAUR DESIGNS
   | Bangle bracelet (black, left arm) ALEXIS BITTAR | Vintage lucite
   bangle bracelet (red, left arm) THE ARCHIVE X YANA | Sheer tights
   CALZEDONIA

   The parallel to William Klein’s 1966 film Who Are You, Polly Maggoo?—a
   key ingredient in the Twiggy-tinged, ’60s-infused cocktail of a
   moodboard behind our cover shoot—is irresistible. In that satirical
   portrait of the Paris fashion world, a young American model named Polly
   Maggoo becomes the obsession of designers, photographers, and TV crews,
   all determined to uncover her “true self.” The more they search, the
   more she disappears beneath projections of beauty and desire. “Every
   time they take my picture,” Polly famously sighs, “there’s a little
   less of me left.”
   (Left) Polka dot bustier mini dress PATOU | Liquid lucite wavy bangle
   bracelet (clear) and puffy lucite bangle bracelet (black, left arm)
   ALEXIS BITTAR | Drift bangle bracelets (silver) and boulder bangle
   bracelet (black, right arm) DINOSAUR DESIGNS | Sheer tights CALZEDONIA
   | Patent leather pumps JIMMY CHOO | (Right) Polka dot bustier mini
   dress PATOU | Earrings and necklace CHANEL

   Jennie’s career, too, has unfolded beneath an unblinking camera eye.
   Yet what distinguishes her from Klein’s tragic mannequin is agency. She
   has learned to command the lens rather than be consumed by it. If Polly
   Maggoo dissected a culture that devoured its idols, Jennie represents a
   generation of artists reclaiming authorship over their image. “Through
   my debut album Ruby, which came out this year—although it feels like
   four years ago—it was a great way for me to explore new sounds and just
   rediscover myself and my love for music, and find new ways to approach
   it,” she says. “The decisions, the thought process, and ideas are
   coming 100% from me. It feels like I own everything. So it definitely
   taught me how to talk to myself.” Thus, while Jennie—like Polly—finds
   herself surrounded by stylists eager to dress her, makeup artists to
   glam her, and producers to shape her sound, she is no passive canvas,
   but an active hand in her own creation.
   Knee-length halter neck dress SCHIAPARELLI | Vintage 1960’s globe
   earrings and square bangle bracelets THE ARCHIVE X YANA | Large molten
   bangle bracelet (silver) ALEXIS BITTAR

   With new solo music coming this year, Jennie is deciding how her future
   will look—and sound. “I honestly have no clue what it’s gonna look like
   yet. I am a very open book right now,” she admits. “I’m excited to get
   deeper with my vocals for sure. And this was homework of mine from the
   beginning, but blending Korean and English into my music, too.” Perhaps
   surprisingly, given her refined and immaculate public image, she speaks
   of horror and thriller films as new terrain for inspiration. “I just
   watched the movie Weapons. Have you watched it?” she asks. “I’ve always
   been a fan of horror and thriller movies. I love the aesthetics. I’ve
   also watched (Guillermo del Toro’s) Frankenstein, which is in that
   world. Something about the dark, mysterious places and visuals in those
   films always inspired me to get into it more. Maybe that could be
   something that I could embrace in my own creativity.”
   Leather and cotton dress TOD’S | Marie hat SEA NY | Luminous orb clip
   earring and liquid lucite wavy bangle bracelet ALEXIS BITTAR | Ring
   PATRICIA VON MUSULIN

   As far as who Jennie will be, she remains open to exploring various
   creative mediums. “I see lots of artists directing their own things or
   designing their own costumes to wear in their videos. I want to say,
   although I don’t know if I’m allowed to say this, but I love fashion
   and would love to design something for myself.” Of course, the world of
   fashion loves her right back—Jennie is a style icon and Fashion Week
   fixture, her presence at Chanel’s front row regularly creating such a
   frenzy that even Polly Magoo would be jealous.

   Even in her downtime away from the flashing bulbs, Jennie is a curious
   being. “I really don’t know if I should say this,” she begins timidly,
   “But I’m on the plane half of the time and in the car or getting glam,
   so I’ve been playing Nintendo Switch. Animal Crossing, Zelda, and Mario
   Kart. Everyone knows I’m not a professional at it, but you know, it
   takes everything off my mind.” When I remind her that she doesn’t have
   to be a master of this pastime, she interjects: “That’s the thing—once
   I get really deep into it, I want to become a professional. So I’m very
   invested in these games right now.” Sometimes, a strong work ethic
   can’t help but infringe on good ol’ fashioned fun.
   Dress RALPH LAUREN COLLECTION | Oversized graphic earrings THE ARCHIVE
   X YANA

   There will be no shortage of planes or cars for Jennie this month as
   she and the rest of BLACKPINK conclude their DEADLINE World Tour. She
   speaks of returning to the stage after a three-year hiatus with a
   surprising sense of comfort, although not immediately: “Obviously, all
   of us were not afraid, but we didn’t know what to expect going back
   into the group and being on tour after three years.” When asked if it
   felt like a homecoming, as well as how “home” had changed, she says,
   “Nothing has really changed, but also, we’ve all released solo albums,
   too. So being able to bring different music into our sets and watching
   each other’s performances from a new perspective was a new thing for
   us, which made it more fun.” Despite her own solo music and that of her
   counterparts (Lisa, Jisoo, and Rosé—all, as with Jennie, mononymous
   like Madonna), the girls do not act as though they are in competition.
   “Overall, being back on stage with all of us together felt very much
   like home. When you don’t go home for a year because of work or
   whatever, and you go back, and it still feels like home…it’s that kind
   of feeling where you don’t need to expect anything. Your body knows
   that you’re home.”
   Dress RALPH LAUREN COLLECTION | Oversized graphic earrings THE ARCHIVE
   X YANA | Boulder bangle bracelet DINOSAUR DESIGNS

   In this light, Jennie’s “home” is one of massive success, though she
   still grapples with how to define the word. “That’s a serious question
   that I ask myself every day,” she says. “But for me, I think…getting to
   look at my own dedication to something that I made and whatever is
   being shared with the world, and if I feel proud of it, if I feel like
   it’s mine, that’s the moment where I’m like, you know, ‘I’m doing
   great, and I feel like my life’s good.’”She pauses, then adds: “If
   someone asked me how I’m handling my success, I would say I’m not. But
   I am proud of how far I’ve come. I’m proud of all the work I’ve made.
   Just the fact that I get to look back at myself, dream bigger, and keep
   going—that’s my way of handling life.” Where Polly Maggoo ends in
   existential uncertainty, its protagonist wandering the lonely streets
   of Paris, Jennie’s story lands on evolution. The ambiguity persists—not
   as absence, but as freedom. We may never fully know who Jennie Kim is,
   and perhaps that’s the point, because she is a shapeshifter not lost in
   the gaze but guiding it. In a world still obsessed with unmasking its
   icons, Jennie’s remains a mystery, but unlike Magoo, it’s one of her
   own making.

   This story appears in the pages of V158: now available for purchase!

   Photography MAR+VIN
   Fashion Anna Trevelyan
   Jennie’s Personal Stylist Minhee
   Creative Director / Editor-in-Chief Stephen Gan
   Interview Mathias Rosenzweig
   Videographer Lukas Chmiel
   Hair Gabe Sin (Seesaw)
   Makeup Sol Lee (Co-Op.)
   Manicure Zola Ganzorigt (The Wall Group)
   Casting Greg Krelenstein (GK-LD)
   Set Design Isaac Aaron
   Set Design Assistants Matt Banister
   Producer Alexey Galetskiy (AGP NYC)
   Movement Director Marly Phillips Nicol
   Retouching Bruno Rezende (Studio Bruno Rezende)
   Production Assistants Ashton Wilson, Justin Barahona, Max Doraev
   Fashion Assistants Damien Lloyd, Tajh Barnes
   Photo Assistants Juliet Lambert, Mei Kobayashi
   Digital Technician Aly Whiteman
   Location AGP West

Discover More

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

     * Magazine
     * Shop
     * Subscribe
     * ON THE COVER
     * Fashion + Beauty
     * Music + Culture
     * Film + TV
     * V IS FOR VOTE
     * Spanish V
     * VMAN
     * Information
     * ABOUT
     * TEAM | MASTHEAD
     *
          +
          +
          +
          +
          +

     *
     *
          +
          +
          +
          +
          +

     * Magazine
     * Shop
     *
     * Subscribe
     *

     * Information
     * ABOUT
     *
     * TEAM | MASTHEAD
     *

   We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.

   You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them
   off in (BUTTON) settings.
   (BUTTON) Accept (BUTTON) Reject

   (BUTTON) Close GDPR Cookie Settings
     * (BUTTON) Privacy Overview
     * (BUTTON) Strictly Necessary Cookies
     * (BUTTON) Analytics

   Powered by  GDPR Cookie Compliance
   Privacy Overview

   This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user
   experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and
   performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our
   website and helping our team to understand which sections of the
   website you find most interesting and useful.
   Strictly Necessary Cookies

   Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can
   save your preferences for cookie settings.
   Enable or Disable Cookies [ ] Enabled Disabled
   Analytics

   This website uses Google Analytics to collect anonymous information
   such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages.

   Keeping this cookie enabled helps us to improve our website.
   Enable or Disable Cookies [ ] Enabled Disabled
   (BUTTON) Enable All (BUTTON) Save Settings
